
PAGE 1
Mars Science Laboratory Landing
 
Press Kit/JULY 2012


PAGE 2
Media Contacts
Dwayne Brown      NASA’s Mars       202-358-1726
Steve Cole    Program       202-358-0918
Headquarters             dwayne.c.brown@nasa.gov            
Washington                                          stephen.e.cole@nasa.gov
Guy Webster          Mars Science Laboratory                818-354-5011
D.C. Agle     Mission     818-393-9011  
Jet Propulsion Laboratory       guy.webster@jpl.nasa.gov 
Pasadena, Calif.        agle@jpl.nasa.gov 
Science Payload Investigations
Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer: Ruth Ann Chicoine, Canadian Space Agency, Saint-Hubert, Québec, 
Canada; 450-926-4451; ruthann.chicoine@asc-csa.gc.ca 
Chemistry and Camera: James Rickman, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, N.M.; 505-665-9203; 
elvis@lanl.gov 
Chemistry and Mineralogy: Rachel Hoover, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.; 650-604-0643; 
rachel.hoover@nasa.gov 
Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons: Igor Mitrofanov, Space Research Institute, Moscow, Russia; 
011-7-495-333-3489; imitrofa@space.ru 
Mars Descent Imager, Mars Hand Lens Imager, Mast Camera: Michael Ravine, Malin Space Science 
Systems, San Diego; 858-552-2650 extension 591; ravine@msss.com 
Radiation Assessment Detector: Donald Hassler, Southwest Research Institute; Boulder, Colo.;  
303-546-0683; hassler@boulder.swri.edu 
Rover Environmental Monitoring Station: Luis Cuesta, Centro de Astrobiología, Madrid, Spain;  
011-34-620-265557; cuestacl@cab.inta-csic.es 
Sample Analysis at Mars: Nancy Neal Jones, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md.;  
301-286-0039; nancy.n.jones@nasa.gov  
              
Engineering Investigation
MSL Entry, Descent and Landing Instrument Suite: Kathy Barnstorff, NASA Langley Research Center, 
Hampton, Va.; 757-864-9886; kathy.barnstorff@nasa.gov  
 

PAGE 3
Contents
 
Media Services Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Quick Facts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Mars at a Glance  .............................................................. 7
Mars Science Laboratory Investigations ............................................. 8
Mission Overview  ............................................................ 25
Comparing Two Mars Rover Projects  .............................................. 34
Spacecraft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Curiosity’s Landing Site  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Recent, Current and Upcoming Missions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Mars Science: A Story of Changes ................................................ 54
Historical Mars Missions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 
 
Program and Project Management ............................................... .61

PAGE 4


PAGE 5
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 5  Press Kit
Media Services Information
NASA Television Transmission
NASA Television is available in continental North 
America, Alaska and Hawaii by C-band signal via 
Satellite AMC-18C, at 105 degrees west longitude, 
transponder 3C, 3760 MHz, vertical polarization. A 
Digital Video Broadcast-compliant Integrated Receiver 
Decoder is needed for reception. Transmission format 
is DVB-S, 4:2:0. Data rate is 38.80 Mbps; symbol rate 
28.0681, modulation QPSK/DVB-S, FEC 3/4. 
NASA-TV Multichannel Broadcast includes: Public 
Channel (Channel 101) in high definition; Education 
Channel (Channel 102) in standard definition; and Media 
Channel (Channel 103) in high definition.
For digital downlink information for each NASA TV chan-
nel, access to all three channels online, and a schedule 
of programming for Mars Science Laboratory activities, 
visit http://www.nasa.gov/ntv.
 
Media Credentialing
News media representatives who would like to cover 
the launch in person must be accredited through the 
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Media Relations 
Office. To apply for credentials, visit http://media-
credentials.jpl.nasa.gov. Specific questions about the 
credentialing process may be submitted to media- 
credentials@list.jpl.nasa.gov. Journalists may con- 
tact the JPL newsroom at 818-354-5011 for more 
information.
News Conferences
An overview of the mission will be presented in a 
news conference broadcast on NASA TV and on 
http://www.ustream.tv/nasajpl, originating from NASA 
Headquarters in Washington, at 1 p.m. EDT on  
July 16, 2012. Back-to-back briefings on Aug. 2, 2012, 
at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., 
will present information about the mission’s science 
goals and capabilities at 10 a.m. PDT, and about 
the flight and planned landing at 11 a.m. Pre-landing 
update briefings at JPL are scheduled for 9:30 a.m. 
PDT on Aug. 4 and 9:30 a.m. on Aug. 5. A post-launch 
briefing at JPL will begin within about an hour of the 
anticipated landing time (10:31 p.m. PDT) under most 
conditions, and within about three hours of the landing 
time if the spacecraft’s status is unknown. All of these 
briefings will be carried on NASA TV and on http://
www.ustream.tv/nasajpl. Specific information about 
upcoming briefings, as they are scheduled, will be kept 
current on the Internet at http://www.nasa.gov/msl.
 
Live Feed
A live feed of video during key landing activities from  
the mission control room at JPL will be carried on 
NASA TV and on http://www.ustream.tv/nasajpl be-
tween about 9 and 11 p.m. PDT on Aug. 5 (midnight 
and 2 a.m. EDT on Aug. 6).
 
Internet Information
Information about NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory 
mission, including an electronic copy of this press kit, 
press releases, status reports and images, is available 
at http://www.nasa.gov/mars and http://marsprogram.
jpl.nasa.gov/msl. Frequent updates about the mission, 
together with public feedback, are available by follow-
ing Curiosity on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/ 
marscuriosity and on Facebook at http://www. 
facebook.com/marscuriosity.   
 

PAGE 6
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 6  Press Kit
Quick Facts
Spacecraft 
Cruise vehicle dimensions (cruise stage and aeroshell 
with rover and descent stage inside): Diameter: 14 feet, 
9 inches (4.5 meters); height: 9 feet, 8 inches (3 meters)
Rover name: Curiosity
Rover dimensions: Length: 9 feet, 10 inches (3.0 meters) 
(not counting arm); width: 9 feet, 1 inch (2.8 meters); 
height at top of mast: 7 feet (2.1 meters); arm length: 
7 feet (2.1 meters); wheel diameter: 20 inches (0.5 
meter) 
Mass: 8,463 pounds (3,893 kilograms) total at launch, 
consisting of 1,982-pound (899-kilogram) rover; 
5,293-pound (2,401-kilogram) entry, descent and land-
ing system (aeroshell plus fueled descent stage); and 
1,188-pound (539-kilogram) fueled cruise stage
Power for rover: Multi-mission radioisotope thermoelec-
tric generator and lithium-ion batteries
Science payload: 165 pounds (75 kilograms) in 10 in-
struments: Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer, Chemistry 
and Camera, Chemistry and Mineralogy, Dynamic 
Albedo of Neutrons, Mars Descent Imager, Mars Hand 
Lens Imager, Mast Camera, Radiation Assessment 
Detector, Rover Environmental Monitoring Station, and 
Sample Analysis at Mars
Launch
Launch Time and Place: Nov. 26, 2011, 10:02 a.m. 
EST, from Launch Complex 41, Cape Canaveral Air 
Force Station, Fla.
Launch Vehicle: Atlas V 541 provided by United Launch 
Alliance 
Earth–Mars distance at launch: 127 million miles  
(204 million kilometers)
Mission
Time of Mars landing: 10:31 p.m. Aug. 5 PDT (1:31 
a.m. Aug. 6 EDT, 05:31 Aug. 6 Universal Time) plus or 
minus a minute. This is Earth-received time, which in-
cludes one-way light time for radio signal to reach Earth 
from Mars. The landing will be at about 3 p.m. local 
time at the Mars landing site.
Landing site: 4.6 degrees south latitude, 137.4 degrees 
east longitude, near base of Mount Sharp inside Gale 
Crater  
Earth–Mars distance on landing day: 154 million miles 
(248 million kilometers) 
One-way radio transit time, Mars to Earth, on landing 
day: 13.8 minutes
Total distance of travel, Earth to Mars: About 352 million 
miles (567 million kilometers)
Primary mission: One Martian year (98 weeks) 
Expected near-surface atmospheric temperatures at 
landing site during primary mission: minus 130 F to 32 
F (minus 90 C to zero C) 
Program
Cost: $2.5 billion, including $1.8 billlion for spacecraft 
development and science investigations and additional 
amounts for launch and operations.
 

PAGE 7
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 7  Press Kit
Mars at a Glance
General
•	 One of five planets known to ancients; Mars was 
the Roman god of war, agriculture and the state
•	 Yellowish brown to reddish color; occasionally the 
third-brightest object in the night sky after the moon 
and Venus
Physical Characteristics
•	 Average diameter 4,212 miles (6,780 kilometers); 
about half the size of Earth, but twice the size of 
Earth’s moon
•	 Same land area as Earth, reminiscent of a cold, 
rocky desert
•	 Mass 1/10th of Earth’s; gravity only 38 percent as 
strong as Earth’s
•	 Density 3.9 times greater than water (compared with 
Earth’s 5.5 times greater than water)
•	 No planet-wide magnetic field detected; only local-
ized ancient remnant fields in various regions
Orbit
•	 Fourth planet from the sun, the next beyond Earth
•	 About 1.5 times farther from the sun than Earth is
•	 Orbit elliptical; distance from sun varies from a mini-
mum of 128.4 million miles (206.7 million kilometers) 
to a maximum of 154.8 million miles (249.2 million 
kilometers); average is 141.5 million miles (227.7 
million kilometers)
•	 Revolves around sun once every 687 Earth days
•	 Rotation period (length of day): 24 hours, 39 min-
utes, 35 seconds (1.027 Earth days)
•	 Poles tilted 25 degrees, creating seasons similar to 
Earth’s
Environment
•	 Atmosphere composed chiefly of carbon dioxide 
(95.3 percent), nitrogen (2.7 percent) and argon 
(1.6 percent)
•	 Surface atmospheric pressure less than 1/100th 
that of Earth’s average
•	 Surface winds of 0 to about 20 miles per hour (0 to 
about 9 meters per second), with gusts of about 
90 miles per hour (about 40 meters per second)
•	 Local, regional and global dust storms; also whirl-
winds called dust devils
•	 Surface temperature averages minus 64 F (minus 
53 C); varies from minus 199 F (minus 128 C) 
during polar night to 80 F (27 C) at equator during 
midday at closest point in orbit to sun
Features 
•	 Highest point is Olympus Mons, a huge shield vol-
cano about 16 miles (26 kilometers) high and 370 
miles (600 kilometers) across; has about the same 
area as Arizona
•	 Canyon system of Valles Marineris is largest and 
deepest known in solar system; extends more than 
2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) and has 3 to 6 miles 
(5 to 10 kilometers) relief from floors to tops of sur-
rounding plateaus
Moons
•	 Two irregularly shaped moons, each only a few 
kilometers wide
•	 Larger moon named Phobos (“fear”); smaller is 
Deimos (“terror”), named for attributes personified 
in Greek mythology as sons of the god of war
 

PAGE 8
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 8  Press Kit
Mars Science Laboratory Investigations 
Mars Science Laboratory Investigations
NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory mission will study 
whether the Gale Crater area of Mars has evidence of 
past and present habitable environments. These studies 
will be part of a broader examination of past and present 
processes in the Martian atmosphere and on its surface. 
The research will use 10 instrument-based science 
investigations. The mission’s rover, Curiosity, carries the 
instruments for these investigations and will support their 
use by providing overland mobility, sample-acquisition 
capabilities, power and communications. The primary 
mission will last one Mars year (98 weeks).
The payload includes mast-mounted instruments to 
survey the surroundings and assess potential sampling 
targets from a distance; instruments on Curiosity’s 
robotic arm for close-up inspections; laboratory instru-
ments inside the rover for analysis of samples from 
rocks, soils and atmosphere; and instruments to moni-
tor the environment around the rover. In addition to the 
science payload, engineering sensors on the heat shield 
will gather information about Mars’ atmosphere and the 
spacecraft’s performance during its descent through the 
atmosphere.
To make best use of the rover’s science capabilities, a 
diverse international team of scientists and engineers will 
make daily decisions about the rover’s activities for the 
following day. Even if all the rover’s technology performs 
flawlessly, some types of evidence the mission will seek 
about past environments may not have persisted in the 
rock record. While the possibility that life might have 
existed on Mars provokes great interest, a finding that 
conditions did not favor life would also pay off with valu-
able insight about differences and similarities between 
early Mars and early Earth.
Habitability
The mission will assess whether the area Curiosity ex-
plores has ever been a potential habitat for Martian life. 
Whether life has existed on Mars is an open question 
that this mission, by itself, is not designed to answer. 
Curiosity does not carry experiments to detect active 
processes that would signify present-day biological 
metabolism, nor does it have the ability to image mi-
croorganisms or their fossil equivalents. However, if this 
mission finds that the field site in Gale Crater has had 
conditions favorable for habitability and for preserving 
evidence about life, those findings can shape future 
missions that would bring samples back to Earth for 
life-detection tests or for missions that carry advanced 
life-detection experiments to Mars. In this sense, the 
Mars Science Laboratory is the prospecting stage in a 
step-by-step program of exploration, reconnaissance, 
prospecting and mining evidence for a definitive an-
swer about whether life has existed on Mars. NASA’s 
Astrobiology Program has aided in development of the 
Mars Science Laboratory science payload and in stud-
ies of extreme habitats on Earth that can help in under-
standing possible habitats on Mars.
Three conditions considered crucial for habitability are 
liquid water, other chemical ingredients utilized by life 
and a source of energy. The Mars Science Laboratory 
mission advances the “follow the water” strategy of 
NASA Mars exploration since the mid-1990s to a 
strategy of determining the best settings for seeking an 
answer to whether Mars ever supported life.
Every environment on Earth where there is liquid water 
sustains microbial life. For most of Earth’s history, the 
only life forms on this planet were microorganisms, or 
microbes. Microbes still make up most of the living mat-
ter on Earth. Scientists who specialize in the search for 
life on other worlds expect that any life on Mars, if it has 
existed at all, has been microbial.
Curiosity will land in a region where this key item on the 
checklist of life’s requirements has already been deter-
mined: It was wet. Observations from Mars orbit during 
five years of assessing candidate landing sites have 
made these areas some of the most intensely studied 
places on Mars. Researchers have used NASA’s Mars 
Reconnaissance Orbiter to map the area’s mineralogy, 
finding exposures of clay minerals. Clays, other phyllosili-
cates and sulfates form under conditions with adequate 
liquid water in a life-supporting, medium range between 
very acidic and very alkaline.
Curiosity will inventory other basic ingredients for life, 
seek additional evidence about water and investigate 
how conditions in the area have changed over time. 
The wet environment in which the clay minerals formed 

PAGE 9
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 9  Press Kit
is long gone, probably occurring more than 3 billion 
years ago. Examining the geological context for those 
minerals, such as the minerals in younger rock layers, 
could advance understanding of habitat change to drier 
conditions. The rover can also check for traces of water 
still bound into the mineral structure of rocks at and near 
the surface.
Carbon-containing compounds called organic mol-
ecules are an important class of ingredients for life that 
Curiosity can detect and inventory. This capability adds 
a trailblazing “follow the carbon” aspect to the Mars 
Science Laboratory, as part of the sequel to the “follow 
the water” theme.
Organic molecules contain one or more carbon atoms 
bound to hydrogen and, in many cases, additional ele-
ments. They can exist without life, but life as we know 
it cannot exist without them, so their presence would 
be an important plus for habitability. If Curiosity detects 
complex organics that are important to life on Earth, 
such as amino acids, these might be of biological origin, 
but also could come from non-biological sources, such 
as carbonaceous meteorites delivered to the surface of 
the planet. 
Curiosity will also check for other chemical elements 
important for life, such as nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur 
and oxygen.  
The rover will definitively identify minerals, which provide 
a lasting record of the temperatures, pressures and 
chemistry present when the minerals were formed or 
altered. Researchers will add that information to obser-
vations about geological context, such as the patterns 
and processes of sedimentary rock accumulation, to 
chart a chronology of how the area’s environments have 
changed over time. Energy for life on Mars could come 
from sunlight, heat or mixtures of chemicals (food) with 
an energy gradient that could be exploited by biological 
metabolism. The information Curiosity collects about 
minerals and about the area’s modern environment will 
be analyzed for clues about possible past and present 
energy sources for life.
Curiosity will measure the ratios of different isotopes of 
several elements. Isotopes are variants of the same ele-
ment with different atomic weights. Ratios such as the 
proportion of carbon-13 to carbon-12 can provide in-
sight into planetary processes. For example, Mars once 
had a much denser atmosphere than it does today, and 
if the loss occurred at the top of the atmosphere, that 
process would favor increased concentration of heavier 
isotopes in the retained, modern atmosphere. Such 
processes can be relevant to habitability and biology. 
Curiosity will assess isotopic ratios in methane if that 
gas is in the air around the rover. Methane is an organic 
molecule, and its carbon isotope ratio can be very 
distinctive. Observations from orbit and from Earth indi-
cate traces of it may be present in Mars’ atmosphere. 
Isotopic ratios could hold clues about whether methane 
is being produced by microbes or by a non-biological 
process.
The mission has four primary science objectives to 
meet NASA’s overall habitability assessment goal:
•	 Assess the biological potential of at least one target 
environment by determining the nature and inven-
tory of organic carbon compounds, searching for 
the chemical building blocks of life and identifying 
features that may record the actions of biologically 
relevant processes.
•	 Characterize the geology of the rover’s field site at 
all appropriate spatial scales by investigating the 
chemical, isotopic and mineralogical composition of 
surface and near-surface materials and interpreting 
the processes that have formed rocks and soils.
•	 Investigate planetary processes of relevance to past 
habitability (including the role of water) by assessing 
the long-time-scale atmospheric evolution and de-
termining the present state, distribution and cycling 
of water and carbon dioxide.
•	 Characterize the broad spectrum of surface ra-
diation, including galactic cosmic radiation, solar 
proton events and secondary neutrons.
Preservation and Past Environments
Some of the same environmental conditions favorable 
for life can, paradoxically, be unfavorable for preserv-
ing evidence about life. Water, oxidants and heat, all of 
which can contribute to habitability, can destroy organic 
molecules and other possible markers left by life, or 
biosignatures. 
Life has thrived on Earth for more than 3 billion years, 
but only a miniscule fraction of Earth’s past life has 
left evidence of itself in the rock record on this planet. 
Preserving evidence of life from the distant past has 
required specific, unusual conditions. On Earth, these 
windows of preservation have included situations such 
as insects encased in amber and mastodons im-

PAGE 10
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 10  Press Kit
mersed in tar pits. Mars won’t have fossils of insects or 
mastodons; if Mars has had any life forms at all, they 
were likely microbes. Understanding what types of 
environments may have preserved evidence of microbial 
life from billions of years ago, even on Earth, is still an 
emerging field of study. 
To determine whether Mars ever supported life, a key 
step is learning where biosignatures could persist. 
Curiosity’s findings about windows of preservation will 
serve this mission’s prospector role: identifying good 
hunting grounds for possible future investigations about 
Martian life’s existence and characteristics. They can 
also guide this mission’s own course, informing deci-
sions about where to drive and which rocks to sample 
in Curiosity’s search for organics. 
Accumulation of rock-forming sediments writes a record 
of environmental conditions and processes into those 
sedimentary rocks. The layers of the mountain inside 
Gale Crater provide a record of events arranged in 
the order in which they occurred. Researchers using 
Curiosity can look at how environments changed over 
time, possibly including transitions from habitable condi-
tions to non-habitable conditions. Some of the clues are 
in the textures of the rocks, and Curiosity will be look-
ing for distinctive rock textures. Other clues are in the 
mineral and chemical compositions. 
Some conditions and processes, such as low tempera-
tures and rapid entrapment in the sediments, can favor 
preservation of organics and evidence about life. As 
Curiosity looks for organics by analyzing samples drilled 
from sedimentary rocks, it will be reading the history of 
past environments whether or not it finds organics.
Some minerals and other geologic materials, such as 
sulfates, phosphates, carbonates and silica, can help 
preserve biosignatures. All of these materials, forming 
under just the right balance of environmental conditions, 
have the potential to preserve fragments of organic mol-
ecules derived from microbes or carbonaceous mete-
orites. But not just any rock formed of suitable minerals 
will do. Most on Earth do not. Expectations for Mars are 
similar, and the chances of a discovery — even if life had 
been present — are very small. If this sounds sobering, 
it should be, but this is the only known way to prospect 
for the vestiges of life on the early Earth. 
The area at Gale Crater accessible to Curiosity as it 
drives during the mission contains rocks and soils 
that may have been originally deposited under differ-
ing conditions over a range of times. Analyzing samples 
from different points in that range could identify which, if 
any, hold organics. The rover might find that the answer 
is none. While such an answer could shrink prospects 
for finding evidence of ancient life on Mars, it would 
strengthen the contrast between early Mars and early 
Earth. The history of environmental changes on an  
Earth-like planet without life would be valuable for un-
derstanding the history of life’s interaction with Earth’s 
environment.
Modern Environment
The Mars Science Laboratory will study the current envi-
ronment in its landing region as well as the records left by 
past environments. Curiosity carries a weather station, an 
instrument for monitoring natural high-energy radiation 
and an instrument that can detect soil moisture and wa-
ter-containing minerals in the ground beneath the rover. 
The investigations of organics and other potential ingre-
dients for life can analyze samples of modern-day soil for 
what nutrients would be available to soil microbes. The 
ability to check for methane in the atmosphere is a study 
of modern processes, too. Methane would break down 
and disappear from the atmosphere within a few centu-
ries if not replenished by an active source, so its pres-
ence would be surprising. 
Selection of Curiosity’s landing site was not based on 
traits favoring present-day habitability. However, much of 
the information this mission contributes about the mod-
ern environment will enhance our general understanding 
of Mars. For example, can organic compounds delivered 
by meteorites persist in the soil close to the surface? 
How does the modern atmosphere affect the ultraviolet 
and high-energy radiation that reaches the surface, pos-
ing a hazard to life and to preservation of organics? How 
might we better estimate levels in the past? The rover’s 
monitoring of radiation levels from cosmic rays and the 
sun also is designed to address astronaut safety on 
eventual human missions to Mars.
Science Payload
On April 14, 2004, NASA announced an opportunity 
for researchers to propose science investigations for 
the Mars Science Laboratory mission. The solicitation 
for proposals said, “The overall science objective of the 
MSL mission is to explore and quantitatively assess a 
potential habitat on Mars.” Eight months later, the agency 
announced selection of eight investigations proposed 
competitively. In addition, Spain and Russia would each 

PAGE 11
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 11  Press Kit
provide an investigation through international agree-
ments. The instruments for these 10 investigations make 
up the science payload on Curiosity.
The two instruments on the mast are a versatile, 
high-definition imaging system, and a laser-equipped, 
spectrum-reading camera that can hit a rock with a 
laser and observe the resulting spark for information 
about what chemical elements are in the rock. The 
tools on the turret at the end of Curiosity’s 7-foot-long 
(2.1-meter-long) robotic arm include a radiation-emitting 
instrument that reads X-ray clues to targets’ composi-
tion and a magnifying-lens camera. The arm can deliver 
soil and powdered-rock samples to an instrument that 
uses X-ray analysis to identify minerals in the sample 
and to an instrument that uses three laboratory methods 
for assessing carbon compounds and other chemicals 
important to life and indicative of past and present pro-
cesses. For characterizing the modern environment, the 
rover also carries instruments to monitor the weather, 
measure natural radiation and seek evidence of water 
beneath the surface. To provide context for all the other 
instruments, a camera will record images of the landing 
area during descent.
The 10 science instruments on the Mars Science 
Laboratory have a combined mass of 165 pounds (75 
kilograms), compared with a five-instrument science 
payload totaling 11 pounds (5 kilograms) on each of the 
twin rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, that landed on Mars 
in 2004. The mass of just one of Curiosity’s 10 instru-
ments, 88 pounds (40 kilograms) for Sample Analysis at 
Mars, is nearly four times the 23-pound (10.6-kilogram) 
total mass of the first Mars rover, 1997’s Sojourner on 
the Mars Pathfinder mission.
Assessing past and present habitability of environments 
at sites visited by Curiosity will require integrating the 
results of the various instruments, not any single instru-
ment. Science operations and analysis will be coor-
dinated through the Mars Science Laboratory Project 
Science Group, whose members are Project Scientist 
John Grotzinger, of the California Institute of Technology, 
Pasadena, Calif.; Program Scientist Michael Meyer of 
NASA Headquarters, Washington; and the principal 
investigator for each of the following investigations.
Mast Camera (Mastcam)
Two two-megapixel color cameras on Curiosity’s mast 
are the left and right eyes of the Mast Camera, or 
Mastcam investigation. These versatile cameras have 
complementary capabilities for showing the rover’s sur-
roundings in exquisite detail and in motion.
The right-eye Mastcam looks through a telephoto lens, 
revealing details near or far with about three-fold better 
resolution than any previous landscape-viewing camera 
on the surface of Mars. The left-eye Mastcam provides 
broader context through a medium-angle lens. Each 
can acquire and store thousands of full-color images. 
Each is also capable of recording high-definition video. 
Combining information from the two eyes can yield 3-D 
views where the images overlap.
Mastcam imaging of the shapes and colors of land-
scapes, rocks and soils will provide clues about the his-
tory of environmental processes that have formed them 
and modified them over time. Images and videos of the 
sky will document contemporary processes, such as the 
movement of clouds and dust.
 
The telephoto Mastcam is called “Mastcam 100” for its 
100-millimeter focal-length lens. Its images cover an area 
about six degrees wide and five degrees tall, in 1,600 pix-
els by 1,200 pixels. This yields a scale of 2.9 inches (7.4 
centimeters) per pixel at a distance of about six-tenths of 
a mile (1 kilometer) and about 0.006 inch (150 microns) 
per pixel at a distance of 6.6 feet (2 meters). The camera 
provides enough resolution to distinguish a basketball 
from a football at a distance of seven football fields, or to 
read “ONE CENT” on a penny on the ground beside the 
rover. 
Its left-eye partner, called “Mastcam 34” for its 34-mil-
limeter lens, catches a scene three times wider — about 
18 degrees wide and 15 degrees tall — on an identical 
detector. It can obtain images with 8.7 inches (22 cen-
timeters) per pixel at a distance of about six-tenths of a 
mile (1 kilometer) and 0.018 inch (450 microns) per pixel 
at a distance of 6.6 feet (2 meters). 
The centers of Mastcam’s lenses sit about 6.5 feet (2.0 
meters) above ground level. The eyes are farther apart — 
about 10 inches (25 centimeters) — than the stereo eyes 
on earlier Mars surface robots. The cameras can focus 
on features at any distance from about 6 feet (just under 
2 meters) to infinity.
When Curiosity drives to a new location, the Mastcam 34 
can record a full-color, full-circle panorama showing ev-
erything from the nearby ground to the horizon by taking 
150 images in about 25 minutes. For a first look, these 
may be sent to Earth initially as compressed “thumbnail” 

PAGE 12
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 12  Press Kit
versions. Mastcam thumbnail frames — roughly 150-by-
150-pixel versions of each image — can be sent as 
an index of the full-scale images held in the onboard 
memory.  
Using the Mastcam 100, the team will be able to see 
farther off to the sides of the rover’s path, compared with 
what has been possible with earlier Mars rovers. That 
will help with selection of the most interesting targets to 
approach for analyzing with Curiosity’s other instruments 
and will provide additional geological context for inter-
preting data about the chosen targets.
The Mastcams will provide still images and video to 
study motions of the rover — both for science, such 
as seeing how soils interact with wheels, and for en-
gineering, such as aiding in use of the robotic arm. In 
other videos, the team may use cinematic techniques 
such as panning across a scene and using the rover’s 
movement for “dolly” shots. Video from the cameras is 
720p high definition at four to seven frames per second, 
depending on exposure time.
Malin Space Science Systems, San Diego, built the 
Mastcams and two of Curiosity’s other science instru-
ments: the Mars Hand Lens Imager and the Mars 
Descent Imager. 
The four cameras from Malin Space Science Systems 
share several design features. They use a Bayer pattern 
filter, as found in many commercial digital cameras, for 
color imaging. Bayer filtering means that the charge-
coupled device (CCD) that detects each pixel of the 
image is covered with a grid of green, red and blue filters 
so that the camera gets the three color components 
over the entire scene in a single exposure. This is a 
change from color cameras on earlier Mars landers and 
rovers, which took a series of exposures through differ-
ent filters to be combined into color composites by pro-
cessing on Earth. The filter design used for Curiosity’s 
science cameras results in pictures in which the color 
closely mimics the way the average human eye sees the 
world. Each of the cameras uses a focusing mechanism 
from MDA Information Systems Space Division, formerly 
Alliance Spacesystems, Pasadena, Calif. Each uses 
a Kodak CCD with an array of 1,600 by 1,200 active 
pixels. Each has an eight-gigabyte flash memory. 
Besides the affixed red-green-blue filter grid, the 
Mastcams have wheels of other color filters that can be 
rotated into place between the lens and the CCD. These 
include science spectral filters for examining the ground 
or sky in narrow bands of visible-light or near-infrared 
wavelengths. These science filters can be used for 
follow-up observations to gain more information about 
rocks or other features of interest identified in red-green-
blue images. One additional filter on each camera allows 
it to look directly at the sun to measure the amount of 
dust in the atmosphere, a key part of Mars’ weather.
Mastcam’s color-calibration target on the rover deck 
includes magnets to keep the highly magnetic Martian 
dust from accumulating on portions of color chips and 
white-gray-balance reference chips. Natural lighting on 
Mars tends to be redder than on Earth due to dust in 
Mars’ atmosphere. “True color” images can be pro-
duced that incorporate that lighting effect — compa-
rable to the warm, orange lighting that is experienced at 
sunset on Earth. Alternatively, a white-balance calcula-
tion can be used to adjust for the tint of the lighting, as 
the human eye tends to do and digital cameras can do. 
The Mastcams are capable of producing both true-color 
and white-balanced images.
The Mastcam principal investigator is Michael Malin, a 
geologist who founded Malin Space Science Systems 
and has participated in NASA Mars exploration since the 
Mariner 9 mission in 1971–72.
Chemistry and Camera (ChemCam)
The investigation using a rock-zapping laser and a tele-
scope mounted atop Curiosity’s mast is the Chemistry 
and Camera suite, or ChemCam. It also includes spec-
trometers and electronics down inside the rover. 
The laser can hit rock or soil targets up to about 23 
feet (7 meters) away with enough energy to excite a 
pinhead-size spot into a glowing, ionized gas, called 
plasma. The instrument observes that spark with the 
telescope and analyzes the spectrum of light to identify 
the chemical elements in the target.  
The telescope, with a diameter of 4.33 inches (110 
millimeters), doubles as the optics for the camera of 
ChemCam, which records monochrome images on 
a 1,024-pixel-by-1,024-pixel detector. The telescopic 
camera, called the remote micro-imager, or RMI, will 
show context of the spots hit with the laser. It can also 
be used independently of the laser for observations of 
targets at any distance.  

PAGE 13
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 13  Press Kit
Information from ChemCam will help researchers survey 
the rover’s surroundings and choose which targets to 
approach for study with the tools on the arm and the 
analytical laboratory instruments. ChemCam can also 
analyze many more targets than those instruments 
can. It can be used on multiple targets the same day, 
while the analytical laboratory investigations — SAM 
and CheMin — take multiple days per target. It can also 
check the composition of targets inaccessible to the 
rover’s other ingredient-identifying instruments, such as 
rock faces beyond the reach of Curiosity’s robotic arm.
The spot hit by ChemCam’s infrared laser gets more 
than a million watts of power focused on it for five 
one-billionths of a second. Light from the resulting flash 
comes back to ChemCam through the telescope, then 
through about 20 feet (6 meters) of optical fiber down 
the mast to three spectrometers inside the rover. The 
spectrometers record intensity at 6,144 different wave-
lengths of ultraviolet, visible and infrared light (wave-
lengths from 240 to 850 nanometers). Different chemical 
elements in the target, in their ionized state, emit light 
at different wavelengths. Dozens of laser pulses on the 
same spot will be used to achieve the desired accuracy 
in identifying elements. Among the many elements that 
the instrument can identify in rocks and soils are sodium, 
magnesium, aluminum, silicon, calcium, potassium, 
titanium, manganese, iron, hydrogen, oxygen, beryllium, 
lithium, strontium, nitrogen and phosphorus.
If a rock has a coating of dust or a weathered rind, 
hundreds of repeated pulses from the laser can remove 
those layers to provide a reading of the rock’s interior 
composition and a comparison between the interior and 
the coating.  
Researchers also plan to use ChemCam to study the 
soil at each place Curiosity stops. These observations 
will document local and regional variations in the soil’s 
composition and — from images taken through the 
telescope by the remote micro-imager — in the size 
distribution of soil particles.
Another capability will be to check for water, either 
bound into mineral composition or as frost. By quickly 
identifying hydrogen and oxygen, ChemCam can pro-
vide unambiguous identification of water if any is on the 
surface in the area Curiosity explores.
ChemCam uses a technology called laser-induced 
breakdown spectroscopy. This method of determining 
the composition of an object has been used in other 
extreme environments, such as inside nuclear reactors 
and on the sea floor, and has had experimental  
applications in environmental monitoring and cancer 
detection, but ChemCam is its first use in interplanetary 
exploration.
Roger Wiens, a geochemist with the U.S. Department 
of Energy’s Los Alamos National Laboratory in 
Los Alamos, N.M., is the principal investigator for 
ChemCam. For developing, building and testing the 
instrument, Los Alamos partnered with researchers in 
France funded by the French national space agency, 
Centre National d’Études Spatiales. The deputy prin-
cipal investigator is Sylvestre Maurice, a spectroscopy 
expert with the Institut de Recherche en Astrophysique 
et Planétologie at the Observatoire Midi-Pyrénées, 
Toulouse, France. 
France provided ChemCam’s laser and telescope. The 
laser was built by Thales, Paris, France. Los Alamos 
National Laboratory supplied the spectrometers and 
data processors. The optical design for the spectrome-
ters came from Ocean Optics, Dunedin, Fla. NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., provided fiber-
optic connections linking the two parts of the instru-
ment and a cooling machine to keep the spectrometers 
cold. The ChemCam team includes experts in mineral-
ogy, geology, astrobiology and other fields, with some 
members also on other Curiosity instrument teams.
Alpha Particle X-Ray Spectrometer (APXS)
The Alpha Particle X-Ray Spectrometer (APXS) on 
Curiosity’s robotic arm, like its predecessors on the 
arms of all previous Mars rovers, will identify chemical 
elements in rocks and soils.
The APXS instruments on Sojourner, Spirit and 
Opportunity produced important findings from those 
missions, including salty compositions indicative of a 
wet past in bedrocks examined by Opportunity and 
the signature of an ancient hot spring or steam vent in 
soil examined by Spirit. The APXS on Curiosity deliv-
ers greater sensitivity, better scheduling versatility and a 
new mode for optimal positioning.
The Canadian Space Agency contributed this 
Canadian-made instrument for the Mars Science 
Laboratory. A pinch of radioactive material emits radia-
tion that “queries” the target and an X-ray detector 
“reads” the answer.

PAGE 14
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 14  Press Kit
The APXS sensor head, about the size of a cupcake, 
rides on the multi-tool turret at the end of Curiosity’s arm. 
The rover will place the spectrometer’s contact-sensing 
surface directly onto most rock targets selected for 
APXS readings or just above some soil targets. 
The instrument determines the abundance of elements 
from sodium to strontium, including the major rock-
forming and soil-forming elements sodium, magnesium, 
aluminum, silicon, calcium, iron and sulfur. In 10-minute 
quick looks, it can detect even minor ingredients down 
to concentrations of about one-half percent. In three-
hour readings, it can detect important trace elements 
down to concentrations of 100 or fewer parts per million. 
It has a high sensitivity to salt-forming elements such as 
sulfur, chlorine and bromine, which can indicate interac-
tion with water in the past.
The APXS will characterize the geological context and 
inform choices about acquiring samples for analysis in-
side the mission’s analytical laboratory instruments: SAM 
and CheMin. Learning which elements, in what concen-
trations, are in the targets will help researchers identify 
processes that formed the rocks and soils in the area of 
Mars where Curiosity is working.
The spectrometer uses the radioactive element curium 
as a source to bombard the target with energetic alpha 
particles (helium nuclei) and X-rays. This causes each el-
ement in the target to emit its own characteristic X-rays, 
which are then registered by an X-ray detector chip 
inside the sensor head. The investigation’s main elec-
tronics package, which resides inside the rover, records 
all detected X-rays with their energy and assembles the 
detections into the X-ray spectrum of this sample.
On Spirit and Opportunity, the need for the X-ray detec-
tor chip to stay cold, and the length of time necessary 
for acquiring a measurement, have restricted most 
APXS measurements to Martian nighttime hours. One 
change in Curiosity’s APXS is the possibility to activate a 
solid-state electric cooler for the detector, for use of the 
APXS during Martian daytime. 
Curiosity’s APXS can make measurements in about 
one-third the time needed for equivalent readings by its 
predecessors. This improvement in sensitivity results 
mainly from shrinking the distance between the X-ray 
detector and the sample by about one-third, to 0.75 
inch (19 millimeters). 
Additional improvement in sensitivity, mainly for heavy 
elements such as iron, comes from increasing the 
amount X-rays emitted by the curium. Curiosity’s APXS 
has about 700 micrograms (in mass) or 60 millicuries 
(in radioactivity), which is twice as much as Spirit’s or 
Opportunity’s. Curium is a synthetic element first identi-
fied in a laboratory in 1944. The specific isotope used in 
all Mars rovers’ APXS instruments is curium 244, which 
has a half-life of 18.1 years. This makes it ideal for long-
duration missions, where even after more than seven 
years of the Opportunity mission, the loss in activity is 
hardly noticeable. 
The additional X-ray intensity will benefit use of a tech-
nique called the scatter peak method, which was 
developed by physicist Iain Campbell, an APXS co-
investigator at the University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada. 
This method extracts information about elements invis-
ible to X-rays, such as oxygen. It was used to detect and 
quantify water bound in the minerals of salty subsurface 
soils examined by Spirit at Gusev Crater. 
When the spectrometer is in contact with the target, it 
examines a patch about 0.7 inch (1.7 centimeters) in 
diameter. It detects elements to a depth of about 0.0002 
inch (5 microns) for low-atomic-weight elements and to 
about 10 times that depth for heavier elements. The dust 
removal tool on Curiosity’s arm turret can be used to 
brush some rock surfaces clean before APXS examines 
them.
For some soil targets, to avoid pushing the instrument 
into the soil, the spectrometer will not be placed in direct 
contact with the target. In those cases, placement will 
use a standoff distance of about 0.4 inch (1 centimeter) 
or less. 
Another new feature for Curiosity’s APXS is an autono-
mous placement mode. With this software, as the arm 
moves the spectrometer step-by-step closer to the soil, 
the instrument checks X-rays from the target for several 
seconds at each step. When the count rate reaches a 
predetermined criterion of what would be adequate for a 
good compositional reading, the software knows, “OK. 
That’s close enough.” The arm’s approach movements 
cease and the longer-duration APXS reading begins. A 
more complex variation of this autonomous placement 
mode may use brief readings at several positions parallel 
to the ground surface, scanning a larger area for certain 
compositional criteria, such as ratio of iron to sulfur, and 
quickly selecting the most distinctive spots for longer-
duration readings.

PAGE 15
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 15  Press Kit
Besides examining rocks and soils in place, the science 
team can use the APXS to check processed samples 
that the arm places on the rover’s observation tray and 
soil freshly exposed by action of the rover’s wheels. An 
onboard basaltic rock slab, surrounded by nickel plate, 
will be used periodically to check the performance and 
calibration of the instrument.
The principal investigator for Curiosity’s APXS is Ralf 
Gellert, a physicist at the University of Guelph in Ontario, 
Canada. He was part of the team that designed and 
built the Spirit and Opportunity APXS instruments at 
the Max Planck Institute in Mainz, Germany, and pro-
vided the new scientific design for the Mars Science 
Laboratory APXS based on the experience gained 
through the long operation of those predecessors. MDA, 
in Brampton, Ontario, Canada, built the instrument as 
the prime contractor for the Canadian Space Agency.  
Mars Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI)
The Mars Hand Lens Imager, or MAHLI, is a focusable 
color camera on the tool-bearing turret at the end of 
Curiosity’s robotic arm. Researchers will use it for magni-
fied, close-up views of rocks and soils, and also for 
wider scenes of the ground, the landscape or even the 
rover. Essentially, it is a hand-held camera with a macro 
lens and autofocus.
The investigation takes its name from the type of hand 
lens magnifying tool that every field geologist carries for 
seeing details in rocks. Color, crystal shapes, mineral 
cleavage planes and other visible details from such 
close-up observation provide clues to a rock’s composi-
tion. In sedimentary rocks, the sizes and shapes of the 
grains in the rock, and the scale of fine layering, provide 
information about how the grains were transported 
and deposited. Sharp-edge grains have not been worn 
down by tumbling long distances, for example. The size 
of grains can indicate whether the water or wind that 
carried them was moving quickly or not.
These clues garnered from MAHLI images can aid both 
in selection of which targets to analyze with other instru-
ments and in directly reading the environmental history 
recorded in the rocks and soils the rover encounters. 
As a close-up magnifying camera, MAHLI resembles 
the Microscopic Imager instrument mounted at the 
end of the robotic arm on each of the twin Mars rovers 
Spirit and Opportunity. MAHLI has significantly greater 
capabilities than those predecessors, however: full color, 
lights and adjustable focus. Also, it sits on a longer arm, 
one that can hold MAHLI up higher than the cameras 
on the rover’s mast for seeing over an obstacle or cap-
turing a rover self-portrait. 
When positioned at its closest range — about 0.8 inch 
(21 millimeters) from its target — the camera’s images 
have a resolution of slightly less than one one-thou-
sandth of an inch (14 microns) per pixel. The field of 
view for that close-up is a rectangle about 0.9 inch (2.2 
centimeters) by 0.7 inch (1.7 centimeters).  
The camera can be held at a series of different dis-
tances from a target to show context as well as detail 
by adjusting the focus. At about 3 feet (1 meter) from 
a target, it still has a pixel resolution of about 0.02 inch 
(half a millimeter) in a view covering an area about 2 feet 
(70 centimeters) wide. By manipulation of arm position 
and focus, the camera can be used to examine hard-
ware on the rover or record time-lapse views of activi-
ties such as opening a sample inlet cover. 
MAHLI has two sets of white light-emitting diodes to 
enable imaging at night or in deep shadow. Two other 
light-emitting diodes on the instrument glow at the ultra-
violet wavelength of 365 nanometers. These will make it 
possible to check for materials that fluoresce under this 
illumination. 
Malin Space Science Systems, San Diego, developed, 
built and operates MAHLI. This camera shares some 
traits with three other cameras on Curiosity from the 
same company. It uses a red-green-blue filter grid like 
the one on commercial digital cameras for obtaining a 
full-color image with a single exposure. Its image detec-
tor is a charge-coupled device with an array of 1,600 by 
1,200 active pixels. It stores images in an eight-gigabyte 
flash memory, and it can perform an onboard focus 
merge of eight images to reduce from eight to two the 
number of images returned to Earth in downlink-limited 
situations.
Curiosity carries a vertically mounted calibration target 
for MAHLI, for checking color, white balance, resolution, 
focus and the ultraviolet illumination.
Ken Edgett of Malin Space Science Systems, a ge-
ologist who has helped run cameras on several Mars 
orbiters, is the principal investigator for MAHLI. A unified 
imaging-science team for the three Malin-supplied in-
struments combines experience in geologic field work, 
Mars exploration and space cameras.

PAGE 16
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 16  Press Kit
Chemistry and Mineralogy (CheMin)
The Chemistry and Mineralogy experiment, or CheMin, 
is one of two investigations that will analyze powdered 
rock and soil samples delivered by Curiosity’s robotic 
arm. It will identify and quantify the minerals in the 
samples. Minerals provide a durable record of past 
environmental conditions, including information about 
possible ingredients and energy sources for life.
CheMin uses X-ray diffraction, a first for a mission to 
Mars. This is a more definitive method for identifying 
minerals than was possible with any instrument on previ-
ous missions. The investigation supplements the diffrac-
tion measurements with X-ray fluorescence capability to 
determine further details of composition by identifying 
ratios of specific elements present.  
X-ray diffraction works by directing an X-ray beam at 
a sample and recording how X-rays are scattered by 
the sample at the atomic level. All minerals are crystal-
line, and in crystalline materials, atoms are arranged 
in an orderly, periodic structure, causing the X-rays to 
be scattered at predictable angles. From those angles, 
researchers can deduce the spacing between planes 
of atoms in the crystal. Each different mineral yields a 
known, characteristic series of spacings and intensities, 
its own fingerprint.
On Curiosity’s deck, near the front of the rover, one fun-
nel with a removable cover leads through the deck top 
to the CheMin instrument inside the rover. The instru-
ment is a cube about 10 inches (25 centimeters) on 
each side, weighing about 22 pounds (10 kilograms).  
The rover acquires rock samples with a percussive drill 
and soil samples with a scoop. A sample processing 
tool on the robotic arm puts the powdered rock or soil 
through a sieve designed to remove any particles larger 
than 0.006 inch (150 microns) before delivering the ma-
terial into the CheMin inlet funnel.  Vibration helps move 
the sample material — now a gritty powder — down 
the funnel. Each sample analysis will use about as much 
material as in a baby aspirin. 
The funnel delivers the sample into a disc-shaped cell, 
about the diameter of a shirt button and thickness of a 
business card. The walls of the sample cell are transpar-
ent plastic. Thirty-two of these cells are mounted around 
the perimeter of a sample wheel. Rotating the wheel can 
position any cell into the instrument’s X-ray beam. Five 
cells hold reference samples from Earth to help calibrate 
the instrument. The other 27 are reusable holders for 
Martian samples. 
Each pair of cells is mounted on a metal holder that re-
sembles a tuning fork. A tiny piezoelectric buzzer excites 
the fork to keep the particles in the sample moving inside 
the cell during analysis of the sample. This puts the par-
ticles in a random mix of orientations to the X-ray beam, 
improving detection of how the mineral crystals in the 
sample scatter the X-rays. The piezoelectric vibration, 
at about 200 cycles per second (middle C on a piano 
is 261 cycles per second) also helps keep the powder 
flowing during filling and dumping of the cell. 
CheMin generates X-rays by aiming high-energy elec-
trons at a target of cobalt. The X-rays emitted by the 
cobalt are then directed into a narrow beam. During 
analysis, the sample sits between the incoming beam 
on one side and the instrument’s detector on the other. 
The detector is a charge-coupled device like the ones in 
electronic cameras, but sensitive to X-ray wavelengths 
and cooled to minus 76 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 60 
degrees Celsius).
Each CheMin analysis of a sample requires up to  
10 hours of accumulating data while the X-rays are  
hitting the sample. The time may be split into two or 
more Martian nights of operation.   
The X-ray diffraction data show the angles at which the 
primary X-rays from the beam are deflected and the 
intensity at each angle. The detector also reads second-
ary X-rays emitted by the sample itself when it is excited 
by the primary X-rays. This is the X-ray fluorescence 
information. Different elements emit secondary X-rays at 
different frequencies. CheMin’s X-ray fluorescence capa-
bility can detect elements with an atomic number greater 
than 11 (sodium) in the periodic table.
Instruments that previous missions to Mars have used 
for studying Martian minerals have not been able to 
provide definitive identification of all types of minerals. 
CheMin will be able to do so for minerals present in 
samples above minimal detection limits of about 3 per-
cent of the sample composition. The instrument will also 
indicate the approximate concentrations of different min-
erals in the sample. X-ray fluorescence can add informa-
tion about the ratio of elements in types of minerals with 
variable elemental composition, such as the proportion 
of iron to magnesium in iron magnesium silicate (olivine). 
It can also aid in identifying non-crystalline ingredients in 
a sample, such as volcanic glass.  

PAGE 17
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 17  Press Kit
Each type of mineral forms under a certain set of 
environmental conditions: the chemistry present (includ-
ing water), the temperature and the pressure. Thus, 
CheMin’s identification of minerals will provide informa-
tion about the environment at the time and place where 
the minerals in the rocks and soils formed or were al-
tered. Some minerals the instrument might detect, such 
as phosphates, carbonates, sulfates and silica, can 
help preserve biosignatures. Whether or not the mission 
determines that the landing area has offered a favorable 
habitat for life, the inventory of minerals identified by 
CheMin will provide information about processes in the 
evolution of the planet’s environment.
David Blake, an expert in cosmochemistry and exobiol-
ogy at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, 
Calif., is the principal investigator for CheMin. He began 
work in 1989 on a compact X-ray diffraction instrument 
for use in planetary missions. His work with colleagues 
has resulted in commercial portable instruments for use 
in geological field work on Earth, as well as the CheMin 
investigation. The spinoff instruments have found ap-
plications in screening for counterfeit pharmaceuticals in 
developing nations and in analyzing archaeological finds. 
NASA Ames Research Center won the 2010 Com-
mercial Invention of the Year Award from NASA for the 
tuning-fork powder vibration system used on CheMin.  
Blake and Philippe Sarazin of inXitu Inc., Campbell, 
Calif., a co-investigator on the CheMin team, developed 
the technology while Sarazin was working as a post-
doctoral fellow at Ames.  
Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM)
The Sample Analysis at Mars investigation, or SAM, will 
use a suite of three analytical tools inside Curiosity to 
study chemistry relevant to life. One key job is check-
ing for carbon-based compounds that on Earth are 
molecular building blocks of life. It will also examine the 
chemical state of other elements important for life, and 
it will assess ratios of different atomic weights of certain 
elements for clues about planetary change and ongoing 
processes.
SAM will examine gases from the Martian atmosphere 
and gases that ovens and solvents pull from powdered 
rock and soil samples. Curiosity’s robotic arm will deliver 
the powdered samples to one of two inlet funnels on the 
rover deck. Atmospheric samples enter through filtered 
inlet ports on the side of the rover. 
SAM’s analytical tools fit into a microwave-oven-size box 
inside the front end of the rover. While it is the biggest 
of the 10 instruments on Curiosity, this tightly packed 
box holds instrumentation that would take up a good 
portion of a laboratory room on Earth. One focus during 
development was power efficiency. For example, the 
two ovens can heat powdered samples to about 1,800 
degrees Fahrenheit (1,000 degrees Celsius) drawing a 
maximum power of just 40 watts. More than a third of a 
mile (more than 600 meters) of wiring is inside SAM.
SAM can detect a fainter trace of organics and identify 
a wider variety of them than any instrument yet sent to 
Mars. It also can provide information about other ingredi-
ents of life and clues to past environments.
One of SAM’s tools, a mass spectrometer like those 
seen in many TV crime-solving laboratories, identifies 
gases by the molecular weight and electrical charge of 
their ionized states. It will check for several elements 
important for life as we know it, including nitrogen, phos-
phorous, sulfur, oxygen, hydrogen and carbon. 
Another tool, a tunable laser spectrometer, uses absorp-
tion of light at specific wavelengths to measure concen-
trations of methane, carbon dioxide and water vapor. 
It also identifies the proportions of different isotopes in 
those gases. Isotopes are variants of the same element 
with different atomic weights, such as carbon-13 and 
carbon-12, or oxygen-18 and oxygen-16. Ratios of  
isotopes can be signatures of planetary processes,  
such as how Mars might have lost much of its former 
atmosphere. 
The suite’s third analytical tool, a gas chromatograph, 
separates different gases from a mixture to aid identifi-
cation. It detects organic compounds exiting a capillary 
column, and then it feeds the separated fractions to the 
mass spectrometer for a more definitive identification.
SAM also includes a sample manipulation system, and 
a chemical separation and processing laboratory to sup-
port the analytical tools. The sample manipulation sys-
tem maneuvers 74 sample cups, each about one-sixth 
of a teaspoon (0.78 cubic centimeter) in volume. The 
chemical separation and processing laboratory includes 
pumps, tubing, carrier-gas reservoirs, pressure monitors, 
ovens, temperature monitors and other components. 
Fifty-two specially designed microvalves direct the flow of 
gas through the system. Two soft-drink-can-size vacuum 
pumps rotate 100,000 times per minute to allow all three 
instruments to operate at their optimal pressures.

PAGE 18
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 18  Press Kit
SAM’s analysis of material from Martian rocks or soils 
begins after powder collected and processed by tools 
on the arm is dropped into one of SAM’s two solid-sam-
ple inlets while the inlet’s protective cover is open. The 
inlet tubes are highly polished funnels that vibrate to get 
the powder to fall into a reusable sample cup. 
Fifty-nine of the instrument’s 74 cups are quartz that 
can be heated to very high temperatures. The sample 
manipulation system pushes the quartz cup holding 
the powder into an oven that heats it to about 1,800 
degrees Fahrenheit (about 1,000 degrees Celsius). That 
process releases gas from the sample at various tem-
peratures, depending on the chemistry of the sample. 
The mass spectrometer measures the release continu-
ously. Some of the gas goes to the tunable laser spec-
trometer for measurement of isotopes. Some goes to 
a trap that concentrates any organics, then to the gas 
chromatograph and mass spectrometer. After use, the 
quartz cup can be baked to prepare it for re-use with 
another sample.
Six of the cups hold calibration solids. SAM also carries 
samples of gases for calibration.
Nine of the cups are for using a solvent method called 
derivatization, rather than high temperature, to pull gases 
from samples of Martian rocks and soils. If the mis-
sion finds a site rich in organics, this method could be 
used to identify larger and more reactive organic mol-
ecules than is possible with the high-heat method. Each 
derivatization cup contains a mixture of a solvent and a 
chemical that, after it reacts with a compound of interest, 
turns it into a more volatile compound that can be sepa-
rated in the gas chromatograph. These chemicals are 
entirely sealed in with a foil cover. For analysis of sample 
powder from a Martian rock or soil by this method, the 
sample manipulation system punctures the foil and adds 
the powder to the liquid in the cup, and the oven heats 
the sample to a modest temperature to let the reactions 
proceed rapidly.
Curiosity’s “follow the carbon” investigation of organic 
compounds begins as a check for whether any are pres-
ent. Although organic molecules are not, in themselves, 
evidence of life, life as we know it cannot exist without 
them. Their presence would be important evidence 
both about habitability and about the site’s capability for 
preserving evidence of life. Meteorites bearing organic 
compounds have pelted Mars, as well as Earth, for 
billions of years. Uncertainty remains, however, about 
whether any organics close enough to the surface for 
Curiosity to reach them can persist in the harsh condi-
tions there without the carbon in them transforming into 
a more polymerized state. 
NASA’s investigation of organics on Mars began with 
the twin Viking landers in 1976. The original reports from 
Viking came up negative for organics. SAM renews the 
search with three advantages. 
The first is Curiosity’s access. Mars is diverse, not 
uniform. Copious information gained from Mars orbiters 
in recent years has enabled the choice of a landing site 
with favorable attributes, such as exposures of clay and 
sulfate minerals good at entrapping organic chemicals. 
Mobility helps too, especially with the aid of high-resolu-
tion geologic mapping generated from orbital observa-
tions. The stationary Viking landers could examine only 
what their arms could reach. Curiosity can use mapped 
geologic context as a guide in its mobile search for 
organics and other clues about habitable environments. 
Additionally, SAM will be able to analyze samples from 
more protected interiors of rocks drilled into by Curiosity, 
rather than being restricted to soil samples, as Viking 
was.
Second, SAM has improved sensitivity, with a capability 
to detect organic compounds at parts per billion levels 
over a wider mass range of molecules and after heating 
samples to a higher temperature.
Third, the derivatization method for assessing organ-
ics in some SAM samples can reveal a wider range of 
organic compounds than was possible with the Viking 
experiment. In doing so, it can also check a recent hy-
pothesis that a reactive chemical recently discovered in 
Martian soil — perchlorate — may have masked organ-
ics in soil samples baked during Viking tests.
If SAM does not detect any organics, that would be 
useful information about the unfavorable conditions for 
life near the Martian surface. Future missions might look 
deeper.
If SAM does detect organics, one challenge will be 
to confirm that these molecules are truly Martian, not 
stowaways from Earth carried to Mars on Curiosity. The 
rover carries five encapsulated bricks of organic check 
material to enable control experiments. The check 
material is a silicon-dioxide ceramic laced with small 
amounts of synthetic fluorinated organic chemicals not 

PAGE 19
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 19  Press Kit
found in nature on Earth and not expected on Mars. 
The basic control experiment will collect a powdered 
sample from an organic check brick with the same 
drilling, processing and delivery system used for collect-
ing samples from Martian rocks, and then will ana-
lyze the sample with SAM. If SAM finds any organics 
other than the fluorine-containing markers, they will be 
stowaway suspects. If only the markers are detected, 
that would verify that organic-detection is working and 
that the sample-acquisition and handling pathway has 
passed a test of being clean of organic stowaways. 
That control experiment can assess characteristics of 
organic contamination at five different times during the 
mission, using the five bricks of organic check material. 
Researchers have a variety of tools at their disposal to 
distinguish organic compounds present in Mars soils 
and rocks from trace levels of organic compounds from 
Earth that might make their way into these samples.
If organic chemicals are present in Martian samples, 
SAM’s inventory of the types and mixtures may provide 
clues to their origin. For example, organics delivered 
by meteorites without involvement of biology come 
with more random chemical structures than the pat-
terns seen in mixtures of organic chemicals produced 
by organisms. Patterns, such as a predominance of 
molecules with an even number of carbon atoms, could 
be suggestive of biological origin. The derivatization 
process also allows searching for specific classes of 
organics with known importance to life on Earth. For 
example, it can identify amino acids, the chain links of 
proteins. While these clues may not add up to a defini-
tive case either for or against biological origin, they could 
provide important direction for future missions.
Methane is one of the simplest organic molecules. 
Observations from Mars orbit and from Earth in recent 
years have suggested transient methane in Mars’ atmo-
sphere, which would mean methane is being actively 
added and then removed from the atmosphere of Mars. 
With SAM’s tunable laser spectrometer, researchers will 
check to confirm whether methane is present, moni-
tor any changes in its concentration, and look for clues 
about whether Mars methane is produced by biological 
activity or by processes that do not require life.
The principal investigator for SAM is Paul Mahaffy, 
a chemist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, 
Greenbelt, Md. He is a veteran of using spacecraft 
instruments to study planetary atmospheres. Mahaffy 
has coordinated work of hundreds of people in several 
states and Europe to develop, build and test SAM after 
NASA selected his team’s proposal for it in 2004. 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center built and tested 
SAM. France’s space agency, Centre National d’Études 
Spatiales, provided support to French researchers who 
developed SAM’s gas chromatograph. NASA’s Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., provided the 
tunable laser spectrometer. Honeybee Robotics, New 
York, designed SAM’s sample manipulation system.
Rover Environmental Monitoring Station (REMS)
The Rover Environmental Monitoring Station, or REMS, 
will record information about daily and seasonal chang-
es in Martian weather.
This investigation will assess wind speed, wind direction, 
air pressure, relative humidity, air temperature, ground 
temperature and ultraviolet radiation. Operational plans 
call for taking measurements for at least five minutes 
every hour of the full-Martian-year (98-week) mission.
Spain provided this instrument for the Mars Science 
Laboratory.
Information about wind, temperatures and humidity 
comes from electronic sensors on two finger-like booms 
extending horizontally from partway up the main vertical 
mast holding the ChemCam laser and the Mastcam. 
Each of the booms holds a sensor for recording air tem-
perature and three sensors for detecting air movement 
in three dimensions. Placement of the booms at an 
angle of 120 degrees from each other enables calculat-
ing the velocity even when the main mast is blocking the 
wind from one direction. The boom pointing toward the 
front of the rover, Boom 2, also holds the humidity sen-
sor inside a downward-tilted protective cylinder. Boom 
1, pointing to the side and slightly toward the rear, holds 
an infrared sensor for measuring ground temperature.
The pressure sensor sits inside the rover body, con-
nected to the external atmosphere by a tube to a small, 
dust-shielded opening on the deck. Electronics control-
ling REMS are also inside the rover body.
The ultraviolet sensor is on the rover deck. It measures 
six different wavelength bands in the ultraviolet por-
tion of the electromagnetic spectrum, including wave-
lengths also monitored from above by NASA’s Mars 
Reconnaissance Orbiter. No previous mission to the 

PAGE 20
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 20  Press Kit
surface of Mars has measured the full ultraviolet spec-
trum of radiation.  
The REMS investigation will strengthen understanding 
about the global atmosphere of Mars and contribute to 
the mission’s evaluation of habitability.  
The data will provide a way to verify and improve atmo-
sphere modeling based mainly on observations from 
Mars orbiters. For example, significant fractions of the 
Martian atmosphere freeze onto the ground as a south 
polar carbon-dioxide ice cap during southern winter and 
as a north polar carbon-dioxide ice cap during northern 
winter, returning to the atmosphere in each hemisphere’s 
spring. At Curiosity’s landing site, far from either pole, 
REMS will check whether seasonal patterns of changing 
air pressure fit the existing models for effects of the com-
ing and going of polar carbon-dioxide ice.
Monitoring ground temperature with the other weather 
data could aid in assessment of whether conditions have 
been favorable for microbial life. Even in the extremely 
low-humidity conditions anticipated in the landing area, 
the combination of ground temperature and humidity 
information could provide insight about the interaction of 
water vapor between the soil and the atmosphere. If the 
environment supports, or ever supported, any under-
ground microbes, that interaction could be crucial.
Ultraviolet radiation can also affect habitability. The ul-
traviolet measurements by REMS will allow scientists to 
better predict the amount of ultraviolet light that reaches 
Mars’ surface globally in the present and past. Ultraviolet 
light is destructive to organic material and the reason 
that sunscreen is worn on Earth.
 
The principal investigator for REMS is Javier Gómez-
Elvira, an aeronautical engineer with the Center for 
Astrobiology (Centro de Astrobiología), Madrid, Spain.  
The center is affiliated with the Spanish National 
Research Council (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas) and the National Institute for Aerospace 
Technology (Instituto Nacional de Técnica Aerospacial). 
Spain’s Ministry of Science and Innovation (Ministerio de 
Ciencia e Innovación) and Spain’s Center for Industrial 
Technology Development (Centro para el Desarrollo 
Tecnológico Industrial) supplied REMS. The Finnish 
Meterological Insitute developed the pressure sensor.
To develop the instrument and prepare for analyzing 
the data it will provide, Spain has assembled a team of 
about 40 researchers — engineers and scientists.  
The team plans to post daily weather reports from 
Curiosity. Air temperature around the rover mast will  
likely drop to about minus 130 degrees Fahrenheit 
(about minus 90 degrees Celsius) on some winter nights 
and climb to about minus 22 Fahrenheit (about minus 
30 Celsius) during winter days. In warmer seasons, 
afternoon air temperature could reach a balmy  
32 Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius).
Radiation Assessment Detector (RAD)
The Radiation Assessment Detector, or RAD, investi-
gation on Curiosity monitors high-energy atomic and 
subatomic particles coming from the sun, from distant 
supernovae and other sources. These particles consti-
tute naturally occurring radiation that could be harmful 
to any microbes near the surface of Mars or to astro-
nauts on a future Mars mission. 
RAD’s measurements will help fulfill the Mars Science 
Laboratory mission’s key goals of assessing whether 
Curiosity’s landing region has had conditions favor-
able for life and for preserving evidence about life. This 
investigation also has an additional job. Unlike the rest 
of the mission, RAD has a special task and funding from 
the part of NASA that is planning human exploration 
beyond Earth orbit. It will aid design of human missions 
by reducing uncertainty about how much shielding 
from radiation future astronauts will need. RAD is mak-
ing measurements during the trip from Earth to Mars, 
supplementing those it will make during Curiosity’s 
roving on Mars, because radiation levels in interplan-
etary space are also important in the design of human 
missions.
The 3.8-pound (1.7-kilogram) RAD instrument has a 
wide-angle telescope looking upward from the hard-
ware’s position inside the left-front area of the rover. 
The telescope has detectors for charged particles with 
masses up to that of an iron ion. RAD can also de-
tect neutrons and gamma rays coming from the Mars 
atmosphere above or the Mars surface material below 
the rover.
Galactic cosmic rays make up one type of radiation that 
RAD monitors. These are a variable shower of charged 
particles coming from supernova explosions and other 
events extremely far from our solar system.  
  
The sun is the other main source of energetic particles 
that this investigation detects and characterizes. The 
sun spews electrons, protons and heavier ions in “solar 

PAGE 21
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 21  Press Kit
particle events” fed by solar flares and ejections of mat-
ter from the sun’s corona. Astronauts might need to 
move into havens with extra shielding on an interplan-
etary spacecraft or on Mars during solar-particle events.
Earth’s magnetic field and atmosphere provide effective 
shielding against the possible deadly effects of galac-
tic cosmic rays and solar particle events. Mars lacks 
a global magnetic field and has only about 1 percent 
as much atmosphere as Earth does. Just to find high-
enough radiation levels on Earth for checking and cali-
brating RAD, the instrument team needed to put it inside 
major particle-accelerator research facilities in the United 
States, Europe, Japan and South Africa.
The radiation environment at the surface of Mars has 
never been fully characterized. NASA’s Mars Odyssey 
orbiter, which reached Mars in 2001, assessed radiation 
levels above the Martian atmosphere with an investiga-
tion named the Mars Radiation Environment Experiment.  
Current estimates of the radiation environment at the 
surface rely on modeling of how the thin atmosphere 
affects the energetic particles, but uncertainty in the 
modeling remains large. A single energetic particle hitting 
the top of the atmosphere can break up into a cascade 
of lower-energy particles that might be more damaging 
than a single high-energy particle.
In addition to its precursor role for human exploration, 
RAD will contribute to the mission’s assessment of 
Mars’ habitability for microbes and search for organics. 
Radiation levels probably make the surface of modern 
Mars inhospitable for microbial life and would con-
tribute to the breakdown of any near-surface organic 
compounds. The measurements from RAD will feed 
calculations of how deeply a possible future robot on a 
life-detection mission might need to dig or drill to reach a 
microbial safe zone. For assessing whether the surface 
radiation environment could have been hospitable for 
microbes in Mars’ distant past, researchers will combine 
RAD’s measurements with estimates of how the activity 
of the sun and the atmosphere of Mars have changed in 
the past few billion years.
Radiation levels in interplanetary space vary on many 
time scales, from much longer than a year to shorter 
than an hour. Assessing the modern radiation environ-
ment on the surface will not come from a one-time set of 
measurements. Operational planning for Curiosity antici-
pates that RAD will record measurements for 15 minutes 
of every hour throughout the prime mission, on steady 
watch so that it can catch any rare but vitally important 
solar particle events.
The first science data from the mission have come from 
RAD’s measurements during the trip from Earth to Mars. 
These en-route measurements are enabling correlations 
with instruments on other spacecraft that monitor solar 
particle events and galactic cosmic rays in Earth’s neigh-
borhood and also are yielding data about the radiation 
environment farther from Earth. 
RAD’s principal investigator is physicist Don Hassler 
of the Southwest Research Institute’s Boulder, Colo., 
branch. His international team of co-investigators 
includes experts in instrument design, astronaut safety, 
atmospheric science, geology and other fields.
Southwest Research Institute in Boulder and in San 
Antonio, together with Christian Albrechts University in 
Kiel, Germany, built RAD with funding from the NASA 
Exploration Systems Mission Directorate and Germany’s 
national aerospace research center, Deutsches Zentrum 
für Luft- und Raumfahrt.
Measurements of ultraviolet radiation by Curiosity’s 
Rover Environmental Monitoring Station will supplement 
RAD’s measurements of other types of radiation.
Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons (DAN)
The Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons investigation, or DAN, 
can detect water bound into shallow underground min-
erals along Curiosity’s path. 
The DAN instrument shoots neutrons into the ground 
and measures how they are scattered, giving it a high 
sensitivity for finding any hydrogen to a depth of about 
20 inches (50 centimeters) directly beneath the rover. 
The Russian Federal Space Agency contributed DAN 
to NASA as part of a broad collaboration between the 
United States and Russia in the exploration of space.
The instrument can be used in reconnaissance to iden-
tify places for examination with Curiosity’s other tools. 
Also, rock formations that Curiosity’s cameras view at 
the surface may be traced underground by DAN, ex-
tending scientists’ understanding of the geology.
DAN will bring to the surface of Mars an enhancement 
of nuclear technology that has already detected Martian 

PAGE 22
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 22  Press Kit
water from orbit. “Albedo” in the investigation’s name 
means reflectance — in this case, how high-energy 
neutrons injected into the ground bounce off of atomic 
nuclei in the ground. Neutrons that collide with hydro-
gen atoms bounce off with a characteristic decrease in 
energy, like one billiard ball hitting another. By measuring 
the energies of the reflected neutrons, DAN can detect 
the fraction that was slowed in these collisions, and 
therefore the amount of hydrogen. 
Oil prospectors use this technology in instruments 
lowered down exploration holes to detect the hydrogen 
in petroleum. Space explorers have adapted it for mis-
sions to the moon and Mars, where most hydrogen is in 
water ice or in water-derived hydroxyl ions.  
DAN Principal Investigator Igor Mitrofanov of Space 
Research Institute, Moscow, is also the principal in-
vestigator for a Russian instrument on NASA’s Mars 
Odyssey orbiter, the high-energy neutron detector, 
which measures high energy of neutrons coming 
from Mars. In 2002, it and companion instruments on 
Odyssey detected hydrogen interpreted as abundant 
underground water ice close to the surface at high 
latitudes. 
The neutron detectors on Odyssey rely on galactic cos-
mic rays hitting Mars as a source of neutrons. DAN can 
work in a passive mode relying on cosmic rays, but it 
also has its own pulsing neutron generator for an active 
mode of shooting high-energy neutrons into the ground. 
In active mode, it is sensitive enough to detect water 
content as low as one-tenth of 1 percent in the ground 
beneath the rover.  
The neutron generator is mounted on Curiosity’s right 
hip, a pair of neutron detectors on the left hip. Pulses 
last about 1 microsecond and repeat as frequently as 
10 times per second. The detectors measure the flow of 
moderated neutrons with different energy levels return-
ing from the ground, and their delay times. Neutrons 
that arrive later may indicate water buried beneath a 
drier soil layer. The generator will be able to emit a total 
of about 10 million pulses during the mission, with about 
10 million neutrons at each pulse. 
The most likely form of hydrogen in the ground of the 
landing area is hydrated minerals. These are minerals 
with water molecules or hydroxyl ions bound into the 
crystalline structure of the mineral. They can tenaciously 
retain water from a wetter past when all free water has 
gone. DAN may also detect water that comes and 
goes with the Martian seasons, such as soil moisture 
that varies with the atmospheric humidity. Together 
with Curiosity’s cameras and weather station, DAN will 
observe how the sparse water cycle on Mars works in 
the present. DAN also could detect any water ice in the 
shallow subsurface, a low probability at Curiosity’s Gale 
Crater landing site.
Operational planning anticipates using DAN during short 
pauses in drives and while the rover is parked. It will 
check for any changes or trends in subsurface hydro-
gen content from place to place along the traverse. 
Russia’s Space Research Institute developed the DAN 
instrument in close cooperation with the N.L. Dukhov 
All-Russia Research Institute of Automatics, Moscow, 
and the Joint Institute of Nuclear Research, Dubna.
Mars Descent Imager (MARDI)
During the final few minutes of Curiosity’s flight to the 
surface of Mars, the Mars Descent Imager, or MARDI, 
will record a full-color video of the ground below. This 
will provide the Mars Science Laboratory team with in-
formation about the landing site and its surroundings, to 
aid interpretation of the rover’s ground-level views and 
planning of initial drives. Hundreds of the images taken 
by the camera will show features smaller than what can 
be discerned in images taken from orbit. 
The video will also give fans worldwide an unprecedent-
ed sense of riding a spacecraft to a landing on Mars.
MARDI will record the video on its own 8-gigabyte flash 
memory at about four frames per second and close to 
1,600 by 1,200 pixels per frame. Thumbnails and a few 
samples of full-resolution frames will be transmitted to 
Earth in the first few days after landing. The nested set 
of images from higher altitude to ground level will enable 
pinpointing of Curiosity’s location. The pace of sending 
the rest of the frames for full-resolution video will de-
pend on sharing priority with data from the rover’s other 
investigations.
The full video — available first from the thumbnails in 
YouTube-like resolution and later in full detail — will 
begin with a glimpse of the heat shield falling away from 
beneath the rover. The first views of the ground will 
cover an area several kilometers (a few miles) across. 
Successive frames taken as the vehicle descends will 
close in and cover successively smaller areas. The video 
will likely nod up and down to fairly large angles owing 

PAGE 23
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 23  Press Kit
to parachute-induced oscillations. Its roll clockwise and 
counterclockwise will be smaller, as thrusters on the 
descent stage control that motion. When the parachute 
is jettisoned, the video will show large angular motions 
as the descent vehicle maneuvers to avoid re-contacting 
the back shell and parachute. Rocket engine vibration 
may also be seen. A few seconds before landing, the 
rover will be lowered on tethers beneath the descent 
stage, and the video will show the relatively slow ap-
proach to the surface. The final frames, after landing, will 
cover a bath-towel-size patch of ground under the front-
left corner of the rover.
Besides the main objective of providing geologic context 
for the observations and operations of the rover during 
the early part of mission on Mars, MARDI will provide 
insight about Mars’ atmosphere. Combining informa-
tion from the descent images with information from the 
spacecraft’s motion sensors will allow for calculating 
wind speeds affecting the spacecraft on its way down, 
an important atmospheric science measurement. The 
descent data will later aid in designing and testing future 
landing systems for Mars that could add more control for 
hazard avoidance.
Throughout Curiosity’s mission on Mars, MARDI will offer 
the capability to obtain images of ground beneath the 
rover at resolutions down to 0.06 inch (1.5 millimeters) 
per pixel, for precise tracking of its movements or for 
geologic mapping. The science team will decide whether 
or not to use that capability. Each day of operations on 
Mars will require choices about how to budget power, 
data and time.
Malin Space Science Systems, San Diego, provided 
MARDI, as well as three other cameras on Curiosity: 
the Mast Camera pair and the Mars Hand Lens Imager. 
Michael Malin is the principal investigator for MARDI, 
which shares a unified imaging-science team with the 
other two instruments from his company.
MARDI consists of two parts: the wide-angle camera 
mounted toward the front of the port side of Curiosity 
and a digital electronics assembly inside the warm 
electronics box of the rover’s chassis. The instrument’s 
electronics, including the 1,600-pixel-by-1,200-pixel 
charge-coupled device (CCD) in the camera, are the 
same design as used in the Mast Camera and Mars 
Hand Lens Imager. 
The rectangular field of the CCD sits within a 90-degree 
circular field of view of the camera lens, yielding a re-
corded field of view of 70 degrees by 55 degrees. From 
an altitude of 1.2 miles (2 kilometers) during descent that 
will provide a resolution of about 5 feet (1.5 meters) per 
pixel, though swinging and shaking of the spacecraft will 
likely blur some frames despite a fast (1.3 millisecond) 
exposure time. 
Color information comes from a Bayer pattern filter ar-
ray, as used in many commercial digital cameras. The 
camera’s CCD is covered with a grid of green, red and 
blue filters so that each exposure samples all of those 
colors throughout the field of view. A piece of white 
material on the inside surface of the heat shield will serve 
as a white-balance target as the heat shield falls away at 
the beginning of the recorded descent video.
Malin Space Science Systems also provided descent 
imagers for NASA’s Mars Polar Lander, launched in 
1999, and Phoenix Mars Lander, launched in 2007. 
However, the former craft was lost during its landing and 
the latter did not use its descent imager due to concern 
about the spacecraft’s data-handling capabilities during 
crucial moments just before landing.
Engineering Instruments
Some of the tools that primarily serve engineering 
purposes on Mars Science Laboratory will also gener-
ate information useful to scientific understanding about 
Mars. Most of these, including the engineering cameras 
and the drill, are described in the spacecraft section 
of this document. One set of instruments carried on 
the heat shield of the spacecraft’s entry vehicle serves 
specifically to gather data about the Martian atmosphere 
and performance of the heat shield for use in design-
ing future systems for descending through planetary 
atmospheres. 
MSL Entry, Descent and Landing Instrument 
(MEDLI) Suite
A set of sensors attached to the heat shield of the Mars 
Science Laboratory (MSL) is collectively named the MSL 
Entry, Descent and Landing Instrument (MEDLI) Suite. 
MEDLI will take measurements eight times per second 
during the period from about 10 minutes before the ve-
hicle enters the top of the Martian atmosphere until after 
the parachute has opened, about four minutes after 
entry. The measurements will be analyzed for informa-
tion about atmospheric conditions and performance of 
the entry vehicle. 

PAGE 24
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 24  Press Kit
Due to the mass of the entry vehicle (5,359 pounds, or 
2,431 kilograms, after jettison of the spacecraft’s cruise 
stage), the diameter of its heat shield (14.8 feet, or 4.5 
meters) and the speed at which the vehicle will enter 
the atmosphere (about 13,200 mph, or 5,900 meters 
per second), the heating and stress on the heat shield 
will be the highest ever for an entry vehicle at Mars. 
Experience gained with this mission will aid planning for 
potential future missions that could be even heavier and 
larger, such as would be necessary for a human mission 
to Mars. 
Models of the Martian atmosphere, heating environ-
ments, vehicle aerodynamics, and heat-shield per-
formance, among other factors, were employed in 
designing the Mars Science Laboratory entry vehicle. 
Uncertainties in these parameters must also be mod-
eled. To account for those uncertainties, the design 
incorporates large margins for success. The margin 
comes at a cost of additional mass. The goal of MEDLI 
is to better quantify these atmospheric entry character-
istics and possibly reduce unnecessary mass on future 
Mars missions, by collecting data on the performance 
of the Mars Science Laboratory entry vehicle during its 
atmospheric entry and descent. 
MEDLI consists of seven pressure sensors (Mars entry 
atmospheric data system sensor, or MEADS), seven 
plugs with multiple temperature sensors (Mars inte-
grated sensor plug, or MISP) and a support electronics 
box. Data from the entry vehicle’s inertial measurement 
unit, which senses changes in velocity and direction, 
will augment the MEDLI data. Each of the temperature-
sensing plugs has thermocouples to measure tempera-
tures at four different depths in the heat shield’s thermal 
protection tiles, plus a sensor to measure the rate at 
which heat shield material is removed due to atmo-
spheric entry heating. 
Analysis of data from the pressure sensors and iner-
tial measurement unit will provide an altitude profile of 
atmospheric density and winds, plus information about 
pressure distribution on the heat shield surface, orienta-
tion of the entry vehicle and velocity. Data from the tem-
perature sensors will be used to evaluate peak heating, 
distribution of heating over the heat shield, turbulence 
in the flow of gas along the entry vehicle’s surface, and 
in-depth performance of the heat shield material.
NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate (which 
has responsibility for planning human missions be-
yond Earth orbit) and Aeronautics Research Mission 
Directorate (which invests in fundamental research 
of atmospheric flight) have funded MEDLI.  F. McNeil 
Cheatwood of NASA’s Langley Research Center, 
Hampton, Va., is the principal investigator for MEDLI. 
Deputy principal investigator is Michael Wright of 
NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.

PAGE 25
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 25  Press Kit
Mission Overview
NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory mission will put a 
mobile laboratory onto the surface inside Gale Crater on 
Mars and use it to investigate the area’s past and pres-
ent environments. The landing will use active guidance 
for improved landing accuracy and a sky crane maneu-
ver for the final descent to the surface. The mission’s 
mobile laboratory is the Curiosity rover, equipped with 
10 science investigations and a robotic arm that can drill 
into rocks, scoop up soil and deliver samples to internal 
analytical instruments. The mission will assess whether 
the area has offered conditions favorable for life and 
whether conditions were favorable for preserving a  
rock record of evidence about whether life has existed 
there. The Curiosity rover has the capability to drive for 
12.4 miles (20 kilometers) or more during a mission last-
ing one Martian year (98 weeks).       
Launch
A two-stage Atlas V 541 launch vehicle lofted the Mars 
Science Laboratory spacecraft from Launch Complex 
41 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Fla. at 10:02 
EST on Nov. 26, 2011. The rocket was produced by 
United Launch Alliance, a joint venture of Boeing Co. 
and Lockheed Martin Corp. The three numbers in the 
541 designation signify a payload fairing, or nose cone, 
approximately 5 meters (16.4 feet) in diameter; four 
solid-rocket boosters fastened alongside the central 
common core booster; and a one-engine Centaur up-
per stage. The launch was on the second day into a 
launch period that went from Nov. 25 through Dec.18. It 
was moved from Nov. 25 to allow time for removal and 
replacement of a flight-termination system battery.
The launch successfully put the Mars Science Labora-
tory mission on its way toward Mars.
Curiosity’s Launch Period
As Earth and Mars race around the sun, with Earth  
on the inside track, Earth laps Mars about once every 
26 months. Launch opportunities to Mars occur at the 
same frequency, when the planets are configured so 
that a spacecraft launched from Earth will move out-
ward and intersect with Mars in its orbit several months 
later. This planetary clockwork, plus the launch vehicle’s 
power, the spacecraft’s mass, and the desired geometry 
and timing for the landing on Mars were all factors in 
determining the range of possible launch dates.
One priority for choice of a launch period within the 
range of possible dates was scheduling the landing to 
occur when NASA orbiters at Mars are passing over the 
landing site. Such scheduling aims to allow the orbiters 
to receive radio transmissions from the Mars Science 
Laboratory spacecraft during its descent through the 
atmosphere and landing. If the landing is not successful, 
this strategy will provide more information than would be 
possible with the alternative of relying on transmissions 
from the Mars Science Laboratory directly to Earth. 
Landing on Mars is always difficult, with success uncer-
tain. After an unsuccessful attempted Mars landing by 
Mars Polar Lander in 1999 without definitive information 
on the cause of the mishap, NASA set a high priority on 
communication during subsequent Mars landings. 
Interplanetary Cruise and Approach to Mars
The Mars Science Laboratory spacecraft is flying for  
254 days to get from Earth to Mars. Most of this period  
is the cruise phase of the mission. The final 45 days are 
the approach phase. 
Cruise Phase
Key activities during cruise included checkouts of the 
spacecraft and its science instruments, tracking of 
the spacecraft, attitude adjustments for changes in 
pointing of the solar array and antennas, and planning 
and execution of maneuvers to adjust its trajectory. 
Opportunities for additional trajectory correction ma-
neuvers, if needed, are scheduled during the approach 
phase.
During cruise and approach phases, the spacecraft is 
spin-stabilized at about two rotations per minute. The 
attitude of the spacecraft’s axis of rotation relative to 
Earth and the sun affects telecommunications, power 
and thermal performance. The plane of the solar array 
on the cruise stage is perpendicular to that axis, and the 
two antennas used during cruise are pointed in line with 
that axis, in the direction the array faces. The parachute 
low-gain antenna, used during the first two months of 
the trip when the angle between the sun and Earth was 
relatively large, works at a wider range of pointing angles 
than possible with the medium-gain antenna, which is 
mounted on the cruise stage. 

PAGE 26
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 26  Press Kit
Thrusters on the cruise stage are fired to adjust the 
spacecraft’s flight path during trajectory correction ma-
neuvers. The first two trajectory corrections, on Jan. 11 
and March 26, removed most of the launch-day trajec-
tory’s intentional offset. That intentional offset away from 
Mars was a precaution to avoid the possibility of hitting 
Mars with the launch vehicle’s upper stage. Prior to the 
first maneuver, the Mars Science Laboratory spacecraft 
was on a course that would have missed Mars by about 
25,000 miles (about 40,000 kilometers) and sped past 
the planet about 14 hours later than the targeted arrival 
time.  
The Jan. 11 trajectory correction used about 59 minutes 
of thruster firings, changing the velocity of the spacecraft 
by about 12.3 miles per hour (5.5 meters per second).  
It removed most of the intentional offset, putting the 
spacecraft on a course missing the target point in space 
and time by about 3,000 miles (5,000 kilometers) and 
20 minutes. The March 26 maneuver used about nine 
minutes of thruster firings to achieve a velocity change 
of 2 miles per hour (0.9 meters per second). It put the 
spacecraft on a Mars-intersect course for the first time.
For the mission’s third scheduled opportunity for a 
trajectory correction, on June 26, the navigation team 
designed a maneuver to put the spacecraft on course 
to reach the top of Mars’ atmosphere at the right place, 
right angle and right time. This third trajectory correction 
used 40 seconds of thruster firings to adjust the location 
where the spacecraft will enter Mars’ atmosphere by 
about 125 miles (about 200 kilometers) and to advance 
the time of entry by about 70 seconds. 
Schematic view of Mars Science Laboratory cruise phase 
from Earth to Mars. Dates are given in Universal Time. 
Six trajectory correction maneuvers (TCMs) are scheduled 
during the voyage from Earth to Mars. Arrival at Mars will be 
Aug. 6, 2012, Universal Time. 

PAGE 27
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 27  Press Kit
Approach Phase
The final 45 days leading up to the Mars landing are the 
approach phase. This phase includes opportunities for 
up to three additional trajectory correction maneuvers. 
These remaining opportunities are on July 29, Aug. 4 
and Aug. 5, Universal Time (July 28, Aug 3 and Aug. 5, 
Pacific Time), with an additional make-up time available 
for the Aug. 4 maneuver if that opportunity is not used. 
Factors that could lead to the need for final-week cor-
rection of trajectory predictions include calculations of 
the effects of solar-radiation pressure and the effects of 
thruster firings used to keep spacecraft antennas point-
ed toward Earth.  
Trajectory correction maneuvers combine assessments 
of the spacecraft’s trajectory with calculations of how to 
use the eight thrusters on the cruise stage to alter the 
trajectory. Navigators’ assessments of the spacecraft’s 
trajectory use three types of tracking information from 
ground antennas of NASA’s Deep Space Network in 
California, Spain and Australia. One method is ranging, 
which measures the distance to the spacecraft by timing 
precisely how long it takes for a radio signal to travel to 
the spacecraft and back. A second is Doppler, which 
measures the spacecraft’s speed relative to Earth by 
the amount of shift in the pitch of a radio signal from the 
craft. A newer method, called delta differential one-way 
range measurement, adds information about the location 
of the spacecraft in directions perpendicular to the line 
of sight. For this method, pairs of antennas on differ-
ent continents simultaneously receive signals from the 
spacecraft, and then the same antennas observe natural 
radio waves from a known celestial reference point, such 
as a quasar, which serves as a navigation reference 
point.
Some activities during the final five days of the approach 
phase will prepare the spacecraft for its atmospheric 
entry, descent and landing. These activities include pre-
heating of some components and enabling others. The 
schedule includes four opportunities to update param-
eters for the autonomous software controlling events 
during the entry, descent and landing. Some parameters 
give the spacecraft’s onboard computer knowledge 
about where the vehicle is relative to Mars. Other param-
eters may be updated based on observations by Mars 
Reconnaissance Orbiter of the Red Planet’s variable at-
mospheric conditions in the week before landing. These 
updates can fine-tune the spacecraft’s autonomous 
controls for its descent through the atmosphere.
Entry, Descent and Landing
The intense period called the entry, descent and landing 
(EDL) phase of the mission begins when the spacecraft 
reaches the top of the Martian atmosphere, traveling at 
about 13,200 miles per hour (5,900 meters per sec-
ond). EDL ends about seven minutes later with the rover 
stationary on the surface. From just before jettison of 
the cruise stage, 10 minutes before entry, to the cutting 
of the sky crane bridle, the spacecraft goes through six 
different vehicle configurations and fires 76 pyrotechnic 
devices, such as releases for parts to be separated or 
deployed. 
The top of Mars’ atmosphere is a gradual transition to 
interplanetary space, not a sharp boundary. The at-
mospheric entry interface point — the navigators’ aim 
point during the flight to Mars — is set at 2,188.6 miles 
(3,522.2 kilometers) from the center of Mars. That alti-
tude is 81.46 miles (131.1 kilometers) above the ground 
elevation of the landing site at Gale Crater, though the 
entry point is not directly above the landing site. While 
descending from that altitude to the surface, the space-
craft will also be traveling eastward relative to the Mars 
surface, covering a ground-track distance of about  
390 miles (about 630 kilometers) between the atmo-
spheric entry point and the touchdown target.
Ten minutes before the spacecraft enters the atmo-
sphere, it sheds the cruise stage. The Mars Science 
Laboratory Entry, Descent and Landing Instrument 
(MEDLI) Suite begins taking measurements. The data 
MEDLI provides about the atmosphere and about the 
heat shield’s performance will aid in design of future 
Mars landings. 
A minute after cruise stage separation, nine minutes 
before entry, small thrusters on the back shell halt the 
two-rotation-per-minute spin that the spacecraft main-
tained during cruise and approach phases. Then, the 
same thrusters on the back shell orient the spacecraft 
so the heat shield faces forward, a maneuver called 
“turn to entry.” 
After the turn to entry, the back shell jettisons two solid-
tungsten weights, called the “cruise balance mass de-
vices.” Ejecting these devices, which weigh about 165 
pounds (75 kilograms) each, shifts the center of mass of 
the spacecraft. During the cruise and approach phases, 
the center of mass is on the axis of the spacecraft’s 
stabilizing spin. Offsetting the center of mass for the pe-
riod during which the spacecraft experiences dynamic 

PAGE 28
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 28  Press Kit
pressure from interaction with the atmosphere gives 
the Mars Science Laboratory the ability to generate lift, 
essentially allowing it to fly through the atmosphere. The 
ability to generate lift during entry increases this mis-
sion’s capability to land a heavier robot, compared to 
previous Mars surface missions.  
The spacecraft also manipulates that lift, using a tech-
nique called “guided entry,” to steer out unpredictable 
variations in the density of the Mars atmosphere, im-
proving the precision of landing on target.
During guided entry, small thrusters on the back shell 
can adjust the angle and direction of lift, enabling the 
spacecraft to control how far downrange it is flying. The 
spacecraft also performs “S” turns, called bank rever-
sals, to control how far to the left or right of the target 
it is flying. These maneuvers allow the spacecraft to 
correct position errors that may be caused by atmo-
sphere effects, such as wind, or by spacecraft modeling 
errors. These guided entry maneuvers are performed 
autonomously, controlled by the spacecraft’s computer 
in response to information that a gyroscope-containing 
inertial measurement unit provides about deceleration 
and direction, indirect indicators of atmospheric density 
and winds.  
During EDL, more than nine-tenths of the decelera-
tion before landing results from friction with the Mars 
atmosphere before the parachute opens. Peak heating 
occurs about 75 seconds after atmospheric entry, when 
the temperature at the external surface of the heat shield 
will reach about 3,800 degrees Fahrenheit (about 2,100 
degrees Celsius). Peak deceleration occurs about  
10 seconds later. Deceleration could reach 15 g, but  
a peak in the range of 10 g to 11 g is more likely.    
After the spacecraft finishes its guided entry maneuvers, 
a few seconds before the parachute is deployed, the 
back shell jettisons another set of tungsten weights  
to shift the center of mass back to the axis of symmetry. 
This set of six weights, the “entry balance mass  
devices,” each has a mass of about 55 pounds  
(25 kilograms). Shedding them re-balances the  
spacecraft for the parachute portion of the descent. 
The parachute, which is 51 feet (almost 16 meters) in 
diameter, deploys about 254 seconds after entry, at an 
altitude of about 7 miles (11 kilometers) and a velocity of 
about 900 miles per hour (about 405 meters per sec-
ond). About 24 more seconds after parachute deploy-
ment, the heat shield separates and drops away when 
the spacecraft is at an altitude of about 5 miles (about 
8 kilometers) and traveling at a velocity of about 280 
miles per hour (125 meters per second). 
As the heat shield separates, the Mars Descent Imager 
begins recording video, looking in the direction the 
spacecraft is flying. The imager records continuously 
from then through the landing. The rover, with its 
descent-stage “rocket backpack,” is still attached to 
the back shell on the parachute. The terminal descent 
sensor, a radar system mounted on the descent stage, 
begins collecting data about velocity and altitude.
The back shell, with parachute attached, separates 
from the descent stage and rover about 85 seconds 
after heat shield separation. At this point, the space-
craft is about 1 mile (1.6 kilometers) above the ground 
and rushing toward it at about 180 miles per hour 
(about 80 meters per second). All eight throttleable 
retrorockets on the descent stage, called Mars landing 
engines, begin firing for the powered descent phase.
After the engines have decelerated the descent to 
about 1.7 miles per hour (0.75 meters per second), the 
descent stage maintains that velocity until rover touch-
down. Four of the eight engines shut off just before 
nylon cords begin to spool out to lower the rover from 
the descent stage in the “sky crane” maneuver. The 
rover separates its hard attachment to the descent 
stage, though still attached by the sky crane bridle and 
a data “umbilical cord,” at an altitude of about 66 feet 
(about 20 meters), with about 12 seconds to go before 
touchdown.
The rover’s wheels and suspension system, which 
double as the landing gear, pop into place just be-
fore touchdown. The bridle is fully spooled out as the 
spacecraft continues to descend, so touchdown oc-
curs at the descent speed of about 1.7 miles per hour 
(0.75 meters per second). When the spacecraft senses 
touchdown, the connecting cords are severed and 
the descent stage flies out of the way, coming to the 
surface at least 492 feet (150 meters) from the rover’s 
position, probably more than double that distance.
Soon after landing, the rover’s computer switches from 
entry, descent and landing mode to surface mode. 
This initiates autonomous activities for the first Martian 
day on the surface of Mars, Sol 0. The time of day at 
the landing site is mid afternoon — about 3 p.m. local 
mean solar time at Gale Crater.

PAGE 29
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 29  Press Kit
Timing Uncertainties During Entry, Descent and 
Landing
The span of time from atmospheric entry until touch-
down is not predetermined. The exact timing and 
altitude for key events depends on unpredictable factors 
in atmospheric conditions on landing day. The guided 
entry technique enables the spacecraft to respond  
and adapt to the atmospheric conditions it encounters 
more effectively than any previous Mars mission. The 
span between the moment the spacecraft passes the 
entry interface point and a successful touchdown in the 
target area of Gale Crater could be as short as about 
380 seconds or as long as about 460 seconds. Times 
for the opening of the parachute could vary by 10 to  
20 seconds for a successful landing. The largest vari-
able during EDL is the length of time the spacecraft 
spends on the opened parachute. Curiosity could be 
hanging below a fully inflated chute as briefly as about 
55 seconds or as long as about 170 seconds. Times 
given in the above description and on the accompany-
ing graphic are for a typical case, with touchdown  
416 seconds after entry.
Mars Surface Operations
The planned operational life for the Mars Science 
Laboratory is one Martian year on the surface. One 
Martian year is 687 Earth days, or 669 Martian days, 
which are called sols. Each sol is 24 hours, 39 minutes, 
35.244 seconds long. The landing site is in an equato-
rial region, at 4.5 degrees south latitude. The season in 
Mars’ southern hemisphere at the beginning and end of 
the prime mission is late winter, about two thirds of the 
way from winter solstice to spring equinox.
One Martian year is how long the scientists and en-
gineers operating the rover will have to achieve the 
Cruise Stage Separation
Time: Entry - 10 min
Cruise Balance Devices Separation
Time: Entry - ~8 min
Entry Interface
Altitude:  ~78 miles (~125 km)
Velocity:  ~13,200 mph (~5,900 meters/sec)
Time: Entry + 0 sec
Peak Heating
Peak  
Deceleration
Hypersonic  
Aero-maneuvering
Parachute Deploy
Altitude:  ~7 miles (~11 km)
Velocity:  ~900 mph  
(~405 meters/sec)
Time: Entry + ~254 sec
Heat Shield  
Separation
Altitude:  ~5 miles (~8 km)
Velocity:  ~280 mph  
(~125 meters/sec)
Time: Entry + ~278 sec
Radar Data  
Collection
Back Shell Separation
Altitude:  ~1 mile (~1.6 km) 
Velocity:  ~180 mph  
(~80 meters/sec)
Time: Entry + ~364 secPowered 
Descent
Sky Crane
Flyaway
Rover Separation
Altitude:  ~66 feet (~20 meters)
Velocity:  ~1.7 mph (~0.75 meter/sec)
Time: Entry + ~400 sec
Mobility
Deploy
Flyaway
Altitude:  0
Velocity:  ~1.7 mph  
(~0.75 meter/sec) 
Time: Entry + ~416 sec
Touchdown
Sky Crane Detail
Profile of entry, descent and landing events, for one typical case. Exact timing will be determined by atmospheric conditions on 
landing day.

PAGE 30
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 30  Press Kit
mission’s science goals. Adding to the challenge, some 
periods of the mission will not be fully available for sci-
ence tasks. These include an initial health checkout for 
about 10 sols or more after landing and about 20 sols 
in April 2013 when communications will be restricted 
due to Mars’ position nearly behind the sun from Earth. 
Strategies for maximizing the science accomplishments 
in the time available include extensive preparations 
before landing, efficiently coordinated use of the rover’s 
capabilities and flexibility for responding to discoveries. 
The structure of science activities is based on sending 
a set of commands to the rover each Martian morning 
for the activities to be performed during that sol. The 
activity plan for a sol needs to fit within the constraints 
of time, power and spacecraft-temperature factors, and 
data downlink volume for that sol. During a communica-
tion relay opportunity when an orbiter passes overhead 
in the Martian midafternoon, the rover transmits data 
about the sol’s activities. Any of the sol’s results that will 
influence the next sol’s planning need to be included in 
this downlink, though additional data from the sol can 
be transmitted during later relay opportunities.
With data from preceding sols, the rover team needs 
to make decisions for each sol, such as what targets 
to approach, what instruments to use, what observa-
tions to make and what downlink priority level to assign 
for each set of data generated during the sol or stored 
onboard from earlier sols. The rover team’s engineers 
collaborate with scientists to determine what activities 
are safe and feasible, and to develop and check the 
sequences of commands for transmission to the rover. 
For the first three months of Mars surface operations, 
the team will work on a Mars time schedule to make 
best use of the key hours between when one sol’s 
downlink is received and when the next sol’s commands 
must be ready, whatever time of day that is at the 
operations center at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 
Pasadena, Calif. Team members’ work shift will begin 
about 40 minutes later each day than on the preceding 
day because a Martian sol is that much longer than an 
Earth day. After these three months, operations will tran-
sition to an Earth-day work schedule and will become 
more geographically distributed as non-Pasadena team 
members return to their home institutions and partici-
pate through teleconferencing.
The landing sol is designated as Sol 0, a change from 
the practice of the Mars Exploration Rover missions, 
which designated landing sols of Spirit and Opportunity 
as Sol 1. On Curiosity’s Sol 0, if the landing has been 
successful, the rover will check its health and measure 
its tilt. It will fire all of its pyrotechnic devices for releas-
ing post-landing deployments. Spring-loaded deploy-
ments, such as removal of dust covers from the Hazard-
Avoidance cameras (Hazcams), occur immediately 
when pyros are fired. Motor-driven deployments, such 
as raising the high-gain antenna dish and raising the 
camera mast, are scheduled for later sols.
Curiosity is also programmed to take images with its 
front and rear Hazcams on Sol 0 both before and after 
removal of the dust covers. It is possible but unlikely that 
these images will reach Earth via orbiter relay on landing 
night. The low volume of data that will fit into early relays 
makes about 15 hours after landing a more likely time 
for Earth to receive these first images from Curiosity’s 
landing site. The first look at some color images taken 
just before landing by the Mars Descent Imager may 
come at about the same time. These may allow a deter-
mination of the rover’s precise location. 
 
A commissioning phase during the first several weeks 
of Mars surface operations prescribes steps to reach 
full-pace science operations safely. This phase will begin 
with about a month of characterization activities to learn 
how all the subsystems and instruments on the Curiosity 
rover are functioning after landing and within the environ-
ment and gravitational field of Mars.
The first drive will probably take place more than a week 
after landing. First movements of the robotic arm and 
sampling tools are scheduled to be part of the char-
acterization activities following the first drive. Following 
the characterization activities, special precautions will 
continue to apply for each first-time activity. Collection of 
science data by some instruments is scheduled to begin 
on Sol 1, and science activities will ramp up during the 
commissioning phase. For example, an analysis of the 
composition of Mars’ atmosphere is a scientific priority 
for early in the mission.
Priority activities for Sol 1 will not require commands 
from Earth. They are built into command sequences 
stored onboard from before landing. One priority is to 
test motions of the rover’s high-gain antenna for direct 
communications with Earth. Use of this antenna will be 
the standard mode for sending commands from Earth 
to Curiosity. The Sol 1 plan includes using the Mars 
Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI) to take the first post-landing 
color image. MAHLI is on the robotic arm, which will 
be in its stowed position, with MAHLI looking off to the 

PAGE 31
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 31  Press Kit
side of the rover, so what scene appears in the first 
color image taken from Gale Crater will be determined 
by the orientation of the rover when it touches down. 
The Rover Environmental Monitoring Station and the 
Radiation Assessment Detector are also in the Sol 1 
plan for collecting data about environmental conditions 
at the landing site. Weather information and the image 
from MAHLI may be received on Earth the second day 
after landing.
On Sol 2, if all is proceeding well, Curiosity will raise the 
mast holding the Mast Camera (Mastcam), Chemistry 
and Camera (ChemCam), and Navigation Camera 
(Navcam). This is a priority so that Navcam can image 
the sky. These early Navcam images will help the rover 
determine the location of the sun and calculate the angle 
toward Earth from that knowledge of the sun’s position. 
This calculation will be used for pointing the high-gain 
antenna toward Earth. Images taken by cameras on the 
mast, showing calibration targets and the terrain around 
the rover, may reach Earth during the first few days after 
landing. 
After completion of the commissioning phase, the pace 
of driving and the frequency of multi-sol stops for acquir-
ing and analyzing rock or soil samples will be deter-
mined by team decisions about science priorities. Some 
possible destinations identified in advance from orbit 
may be within several weeks of driving distance from the 
landing site. With the time taken to investigate nearer 
stopping points, other likely destinations might be more 
than a year away.
Communications Strategy
Like all of NASA’s interplanetary missions, the Mars 
Science Laboratory will rely on the agency’s Deep 
Space Network to communicate with the spacecraft 
and to track it during flight. The network has groups of 
antennas at three locations: at Goldstone in California’s 
Mojave Desert; near Madrid, Spain; and near Canberra, 
Australia. These locations are about one-third of the 
way around the world from each other. That assures, 
whatever time of day it is on Earth, at least one of them 
will have the spacecraft in view during its trip from Earth 
through landing. At least one location will have Mars in 
view at any time during the rover’s Mars-surface opera-
tions. Each complex is equipped with one antenna  
230 feet (70 meters) in diameter, at least two antennas 
112 feet (34 meters) in diameter, and smaller antennas. 
All three complexes communicate directly with the con-
trol hub at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, 
Calif.  
As the spacecraft travels from Earth to Mars during the 
cruise and approach phases of the mission, it commu-
nicates directly with Earth in the X-band portion of the 
radio spectrum (at 7 to 8 gigahertz). For this, the space-
craft uses a transponder and amplifier in the spacecraft’s 
descent stage and two antennas. One of the antennas, 
the parachute low-gain antenna, is on the aeroshell’s 
parachute cone, which is exposed through the center of 
the cruise stage. The other, the medium-gain antenna, 
is mounted on the cruise stage. The parachute low-
gain antenna provided communications during the early 
weeks of the cruise to Mars, and will do so again starting 
shortly before cruise-stage separation. For most of the 
voyage, the job switched to the medium-gain antenna, 
which provides higher data rates but requires more re-
strictive pointing toward Earth. The telecommunications 
system provides position and velocity information for 
navigation, as well carrying data and commands.
Communication during atmospheric entry, descent and 
landing is a high priority. Landings on Mars are notori-
ously difficult. If this landing were not successful, main-
taining communications during the entry, descent and 
landing would provide critical diagnostic information that 
could influence the design of future missions.
All three orbiters currently active at Mars — NASA’s 
Mars Odyssey and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter and 
the European Space Agency’s Mars Express — will be 
at positions where they can receive transmissions from 
the Mars Science Laboratory spacecraft during its entry, 
descent and landing. These transmissions to the orbit-
ers use the ultra-high frequency (UHF) portion of the 
radio spectrum (at about 400 megahertz) from three 
different UHF antennas. The parachute UHF antenna, 
mounted on the back shell, transmits information from 
a few minutes before atmospheric entry until the rover 
and descent stage separate from the back shell. At that 
point, the descent UHF antenna on the descent stage 
takes over. When the rover drops away from the descent 
stage on its sky-crane bridle, the rover UHF antenna is 
exposed to begin transmissions that continue through 
landing.  
The orbiters relay to Earth via X-band the information 
they receive from the Mars Science Laboratory during 
this critical period. Only Odyssey relays the information 
immediately, however. The other two orbiters record 

PAGE 32
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 32  Press Kit
data from the Mars Science Laboratory spacecraft, hold 
it onboard, and send it to Earth hours later. 
The Odyssey relay, called “bent pipe,” is what the flight 
team and the public will rely upon on landing day for 
step-by-step information about the latter part of the 
descent and landing. Odyssey will not begin receiving 
transmissions from Mars Science Laboratory until about 
two minutes after atmospheric entry. After first acquisi-
tion of signal, the orbiter may lose and regain the signal 
more than once as the descending spacecraft goes 
through changes in configuration. Odyssey will be in 
position to continue receiving and relaying information 
from Curiosity for about half a minute to more than two 
minutes after the rover lands. Then the orbiter will drop 
below the horizon from the landing-site perspective. 
Mission engineers are uncertain how soon after landing 
the signal will be lost, because of uncertainty in dura-
tion of the entry, descent and landing process, and the 
possibility that Curiosity could land where a hill or other 
obstruction blocks the line of sight between the rover 
and the orbiter.
The Mars Science Laboratory spacecraft will also 
transmit in X-band during its entry, descent and land-
ing process. This is the expected path for confirma-
tion of the initial events in the process. Due to signal 
strength constraints, these transmissions will be simple 
tones, comparable to semaphore codes, rather than full 
telemetry. The Deep Space Network will listen for these 
direct-to-Earth transmissions. However, Earth will go out 
of view of the spacecraft, “setting” below the Martian 
horizon, partway through the descent, so the X-band 
tones will not be available for confirming the final steps 
in descent and landing. The X-band antenna in use 
from cruise-stage separation until atmospheric entry is 
the parachute low-gain antenna located on the back 
shell. Then, transmissions are shifted to a tilted low-gain 
antenna, also on the back shell. This tilted antenna will 
transmit tones during the banking maneuvers of the 
guided entry. About five minutes after the spacecraft en-
ters the atmosphere, possibly shortly after the parachute 
opens, Earth will set, ending receipt of X-band tones. By 
then, the bent-pipe relay via Odyssey may have begun. 
Radio transmissions travel at the speed of light. The 
distance between Mars and Earth on Curiosity’s landing 
day, 154 million miles (248 million kilometers), means the 
signal takes 13.8 minutes to cross at light speed. The 
whole process of entry, descent and landing takes about 
seven minutes. By the time any transmissions could be 
reaching Earth with confirmation of the first events of that 
process, Curiosity will actually be on the surface of Mars 
already, whether the landing was successful or not. 
The communication links are not necessary for a suc-
cessful landing. Under some scenarios of communica-
tion difficulties, the flight team on Earth could have  
no confirmation of safe landing for a day or more  
and still recover a successful mission after regaining 
communication.
During Mars surface operations, the rover Curiosity has 
multiple options available for receiving commands from 
mission controllers on Earth and for returning rover sci-
ence and engineering information. 
Curiosity has the capability to communicate directly with 
Earth via X-band links with the Deep Space Network. 
This capability will be used routinely to deliver com-
mands to the rover each morning on Mars. It can also 
be used to return information to Earth, but only at 
relatively low data rates — on the order of kilobits per 
second — due to the rover’s limited power and antenna 
size, and to the long distance between Earth and Mars.
Curiosity will return most information via UHF relay links, 
using one of its two redundant Electra-Lite radios to 
communicate with a Mars orbiter passing overhead. In 
their trajectories around Mars, the Mars Reconnaissance 
Orbiter and Mars Odyssey orbiter each fly over the 
Curiosity landing site at least once each afternoon and 
once each morning before dawn. While these contact 
opportunities are short in duration, typically lasting only 
about 10 minutes, the proximity of the orbiters allows 
Curiosity to transmit at much higher data rates than the 
rover can use for direct-to-Earth transmissions. The rov-
er can transmit to Odyssey at up to about 0.25 megabit 
per second and to the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter at 
up to about 2 megabits per second. The orbiters, with 
their higher-power transmitters and larger antennas, then 
take the job of relaying the information via X-band to the 
Deep Space Network on Earth. Mission plans call for 
the return of 250 megabits of Curiosity data per Martian 
day over these relay links. The links can also be used for 
delivering commands from Earth to Curiosity.
While not planned for routine operational use dur-
ing Curiosity’s surface mission, the European Space 
Agency’s Mars Express orbiter will be available as a 
backup communications relay asset should NASA’s relay 
orbiters become unavailable for any period of time.

PAGE 33
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 33  Press Kit
Planetary Protection
When sending missions to Mars, precautions must be 
taken to avoid introduction of microbes from Earth by 
robotic spacecraft. This is consistent with United States 
obligations under the 1967 Outer Space Treaty, the 
international treaty stipulating that exploration must be 
conducted in a manner that avoids harmful contami-
nation of celestial bodies. “Planetary protection” is the 
discipline responsible for the development of rules and 
practices used to avoid biological contamination in the 
process of exploration. NASA has a planetary protection 
officer responsible for establishing and enforcing plan-
etary protection regulations. Each spacecraft mission is 
responsible for implementing measures to comply with 
the regulations. In compliance with the treaty and NASA 
regulations, the Mars Science Laboratory flight hardware 
has been designed and built to meet planetary protec-
tion requirements.
NASA’s primary strategy for preventing contamina-
tion of Mars with Earth organisms is to be sure that all 
hardware going to the planet is biologically clean. The 
Mars Science Laboratory mission is allowed to carry up 
to 500,000 bacterial spores on the entire flight system. 
That’s about one tenth as many as in a typical teaspoon 
of seawater. Spore-forming bacteria have been the 
focus of planetary protection standards because these 
bacteria can survive harsh conditions for many years as 
inactive spores. One requirement for this mission is that 
the exposed interior and exterior surfaces of the landed 
system, which includes the rover, parachute and back 
shell, must not carry a total number of bacterial spores 
greater than 300,000, with the average spore density 
not exceeding 300 spores per square meter (about 11 
square feet). This ensures that the biological load is not 
concentrated in one place. The heat shield and descent 
stage will hit the ground hard enough that hardware 
could break open. The number of spores inside this 
hardware that could be exposed by the hard landings 
of these components must be included in the 500,000 
maximum number. 
Two common methods used for reducing the number 
of spores on the spacecraft are alcohol wipe clean-
ing and dry heat microbial reduction. Technicians and 
engineers who assembled the spacecraft and prepared 
it for launch routinely cleaned surfaces by wiping them 
with alcohol and other solvents. Components tolerant of 
high temperature were heated to reduce spore burden 
according to NASA specification, at temperatures rang-
ing from 230 to 295 degrees Fahrenheit (110 to 146 
degrees Celsius) for durations up to 144 hours. The 
planetary protection team carefully sampled the surfac-
es and performed microbiological tests to demonstrate 
that the spacecraft meets requirements for biological 
cleanliness.
 
The Mars Science Laboratory is also complying with a 
requirement to avoid going to any site on Mars known 
to have water or water-ice within 3.3 feet (1 meter) of 
the surface. This is a precaution against any landing-day 
accident that could introduce hardware not fully steril-
ized by dry heat into an environment where heat from 
the mission’s radioisotope thermoelectric generator and 
a Martian water source could provide conditions favor-
able for microbes from Earth to grow on Mars. 
Another way of making sure the mission does not trans-
port Earth life to Mars is to ensure that any hardware not 
meeting cleanliness standards does not go to Mars ac-
cidentally. When the Atlas launch vehicle’s upper stage 
Centaur separated from the spacecraft, the two objects 
were traveling on nearly identical trajectories. To prevent 
the possibility of the Centaur hitting Mars, that shared 
flight path was deliberately set so that the spacecraft 
would miss Mars if not for later maneuvers to adjust its 
trajectory. By design, the Centaur was never aimed at 
Mars. 
Portions of the flight hardware will impact the surface of 
Mars as part of a normal landing event. This impact may 
cause the hardware to split open and potentially release 
spores trapped inside the hardware during manufactur-
ing processes. To ensure MSL does not exceed the 
spore allocation, studies were conducted on various 
materials, including paint, propellants and adhesives, to 
determine the number of spores in a given volume. In 
many cases the parts of the spacecraft containing these 
materials were treated with dry heat microbial reduction 
to reduce the number of spores. For hardware expect-
ed to impact Mars, such as the cruise stage after its 
separation from the aeroshell, a detailed thermal analy-
sis was conducted to make sure that plunging through 
Mars’ atmosphere creates enough heat that few to no 
spores survive.

PAGE 34
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 34  Press Kit
Comparing Two Mars Rover Projects
Rovers     1 (Curiosity)    2 (Spirit and Opportunity)
Launch vehicle   Atlas V     Delta II
Heat shield diameter   14.8 feet (4.5 meters)   8.7 feet (2.65 meters)
Design mission life on Mars  1 Mars year (98 weeks)   90 Mars sols (13 weeks)
Science Payload   10 instruments, 165 pounds   5 instruments, 11 pounds  
     (75 kilograms)    (5 kilograms)
Rover mass    1,982 pounds (899 kilograms)  374 pounds (170 kilograms)
Rover size (excluding arm)  Length 10 feet (3 meters);   Length 5.2 feet (1.6 meters); 
     width 9 feet (2.7 meters);   width 7.5 feet (2.3 meters);  
     height 7 feet (2.2 meters)  height 4.9 feet (1.5 meters)
Robotic arm    7 feet (2.1 meters) long,   2.5 feet (0.8 meter) long,  
     deploys two instruments,  deploys three instruments,  
     collects powdered samples  removes surfaces of rocks,  
     from rocks, scoops soil, prepares brushes surfaces 
     and delivers samples for analytic  
     instruments, brushes surfaces 
Entry, descent and landing   Guided entry, sky crane   Ballistic entry, air bags
Landing ellipse    12 miles (20 kilometers) long  50 miles (80 kilometers) long 
(99-percent confidence area) 
Power supply on Mars   Multi-mission radioisotope  Solar photovoltaic panels  
     thermoelectric generator  (less than 1,000 watt hours per sol) 
     (about 2,700 watt hours per sol)  
Computer    Redundant pair, 200 megahertz,  Single, 20 megahertz, 
     250 MB of RAM, 2 GB of   128 MB of RAM, 256 MB of  
     flash memory    flash memory 
Mars Science Laboratory Mars Exploration Rovers

PAGE 35
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 35  Press Kit
The Mars Science Laboratory spacecraft consists of 
four major elements: rover, descent stage, aeroshell 
and cruise stage. The rover, Curiosity, has the science 
payload and systems that enable the rover to use the 
payload effectively and send home the results. The 
descent stage performs the final moments of delivering 
the rover to the surface of Mars. The aeroshell, which 
includes the heat shield and the back shell, provides 
thermal protection and maneuverable lift during the initial 
portion of descent through the Martian atmosphere, and 
then a parachute ride for the next portion of the descent. 
The cruise stage provides trajectory maneuvers, electri-
cal power, communications and other functions during 
the eight months from launch to landing.
Cruise Stage
The cruise stage is doughnut-shaped, about five times 
wider than it is tall, with 10 radiators arranged around 
the perimeter. The hole of the doughnut sits over a 
cone holding the parachute on top of the aeroshell. One 
surface of the cruise stage was attached to the launch 
vehicle. That attachment was severed within the first 
hour after launch. The other surface of the cruise stage 
attaches to the top of the aeroshell. That attachment 
will be severed 10 minutes before the spacecraft enters 
Mars’ atmosphere. During the 254 days between those 
Back Shell  
Interface Plate
Parachute Support 
Structure
Parachute
Bridle  
Umbilical
Device
Cruise Stage
Back Shell
Descent Stage
Rover
Heat Shield
Entry
Vehicle
System
two separation events, the cruise stage performs es-
sential tasks of the flight, though it uses the computer 
inside the rover.
The cruise stage primary structure is aluminum. An in-
ner ring connects to the launch vehicle interface and the 
back shell interface plate. A series of ribs connect other 
components. The cruise propulsion system is used to 
maintain the spacecraft’s spin rate, adjust the space-
craft’s orientation, and provide propulsion for trajectory 
correction maneuvers during the trip between Earth 
and Mars. Two clusters of thrusters each include four 
thruster engines in different orientations enabling differ-
ent directions of thrust. Each of the eight thrusters can 
provide about 1.1 pounds (5 newtons) of force. They 
use hydrazine, a monopropellant that does not re-
quire an oxygen source. Hydrazine is a corrosive liquid 
compound of nitrogen and hydrogen that decomposes 
explosively into expanding gases when exposed to a 
catalyst in the thrusters. Two spherical propellant tanks 
on the cruise stage, each 19 inches (48 centimeters) in 
diameter, supply the pressurized propellant. Aerojet built 
the thrusters at its Redmond, Wash., facility. On both 
the cruise stage and descent stage, fuel tanks are from 
ATK Space Systems, Inc., Commerce, Calif.; and pres-
surant tanks are from Arde, Inc., Carlstadt, N.J.
Mars Science Laboratory flight system, expanded view
Spacecraft

PAGE 36
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 36  Press Kit
The spacecraft spins at about two rotations per minute 
for stability on its way to Mars. The cruise stage moni-
tors the spin rate and the spacecraft’s attitude (orienta-
tion) with a star scanner and one of two sun sensor 
assemblies. Each of the sun sensor assemblies, from 
Adcole Corp., Marlborough, Mass., includes four sun-
sensor heads pointing in different directions. Based on 
star tracking and sun sensing information, the cruise 
stage uses its thrusters as necessary to maintain the 
spin rate and attitude. 
Most of the electrical power for the spacecraft during the 
trip from Earth to Mars is provided by sunshine hitting 
a ring-shaped array of photovoltaic cells on the upper 
surface of the cruise stage. The multi-mission radioiso-
tope thermoelectric generator on the rover supplements 
the electricity provided by the cruise solar array on the 
way to Mars. The solar array has six physical panels 
totaling 138 square feet (12.8 square meters) of active 
photovoltaic area. The photovoltaic cells from Emcore 
Corp., Albuquerque, N.M., use layers of three different 
materials to gain electricity from different portions of the 
solar spectrum. The layers are gallium indium phospho-
rus, gallium arsenide and germanium. If operated at full 
capacity at Earth, the array could produce about 2,500 
watts, which would exceed the spacecraft’s needs. 
The array and its operation are designed to satisfy the 
mission’s requirements from launch day to the Mars ap-
proach. At its farthest from the sun, during the approach 
to Mars, the array will produce 1,080 watts or more, 
even when facing as much as 43 degrees away from 
the sun. 
Another important function for the cruise stage is to 
maintain temperatures within designed ranges for the 
parts of the spacecraft inside the aeroshell as well as 
for the cruise stage itself. The 10 radiators of the heat-
rejection system are mounted as a ring around the 
outer edge of the cruise stage. Fluid pumped through a 
circulatory system disperses heat from the rover’s multi-
mission radioisotope thermoelectric generator to warm 
the electronics of the cruise stage and to be released 
into space by the radiators.
The medium-gain antenna mounted on the cruise stage 
serves in telecommunications with Earth during most of 
the trip from Earth to Mars.  
  
Aeroshell
The aeroshell that encapsulates the rover and descent 
stage during the flight to Mars protects them from  
friction with Mars’ atmosphere and provides other  
functions.   
The Mars Science Laboratory aeroshell is not only the 
biggest ever built for a planetary mission, but also incor-
porates major innovations in attitude control for guided 
entry and in thermal protection material. Lockheed 
Martin Space Systems, Denver, built the aeroshell’s heat 
shield and back shell.
The diameter of the heat shield is 14.8 feet (4.5 meters). 
For comparison, heat shields of the Apollo capsules 
that returned astronauts to Earth after visits to the moon 
were just under 13 feet (4 meters) in diameter, and the 
heat shields for the Mars Exploration Rovers, Spirit and 
Opportunity, were 8.7 feet (2.65 meters). 
This aeroshell, unlike any predecessor for an extrater-
restrial mission, has a steering capability. This is a key 
to the mission’s guided entry innovation for added 
precision in landing. During a crucial portion of descent 
through the upper atmosphere of Mars, before the back 
shell deploys its parachute, the center of mass of the 
spacecraft will be offset from the axis of symmetry (a 
line through the center of the aeroshell). This offset puts 
the aeroshell at an angle to its direction of movement, 
creating lift as the spacecraft interacts with the atmo-
sphere. With lift, the spacecraft can fly like a wing, rather 
than dropping like a rock. A reaction control system with 
small thrusters to adjust the orientation of the spacecraft 
can steer banking turns. A series of turns can shorten 
the net horizontal distance the spacecraft covers during 
its descent. Performed in response to sensing how the 
spacecraft is reacting to unpredictable variability in the 
atmosphere, the maneuvers counteract the unpredict-
ability and provide a more precise landing.
The heat shield uses a different thermal protection 
system than used on earlier Mars missions’ heat 
shields, because the unique entry trajectory profile and 
the mass and size of the vehicle could create external 
temperatures up to 3,800 degrees Fahrenheit (about 
2,100 degrees Celsius). The heat shield is covered with 
tiles of phenolic impregnated carbon ablator (PICA) 
material. NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, 
Calif., invented the PICA material; Fiber Materials Inc., 
Biddeford, Maine, made the tiles. PICA was first flown 
as the thermal protection system on the heat shield of 
NASA’s Stardust Sample Return Capsule.
The heat shield carries sensors for collecting data about 
Mars’ atmosphere and the performance of the heat 

PAGE 37
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 37  Press Kit
shield. These are part of the Mars Science Laboratory 
Entry, Descent and Landing Instrument (MEDLI) Suite, 
which is described in the Mars Science Laboratory 
Investigations section of this document. 
The back shell, besides making up the upper portion of 
the capsule protecting the rover during passage through 
Mars’ atmosphere, includes several devices used during 
the spacecraft’s atmospheric entry and descent. 
The back shell carries two sets of detachable tungsten 
weights for altering the spacecraft’s center of mass.
Eight small thrusters in the upper half of the back shell 
are used for the guided entry maneuvers.  
A conical structure at the top of the back shell holds 
the parachute and its deployment mechanism. The 
parachute is the largest ever built for an extraterrestrial 
mission. It uses a configuration called disk-gap-band. It 
has 80 suspension lines, measures 165 feet (50 meters) 
in length, and opens to a diameter of 51 feet (nearly  
16 meters). Most of the orange and white fabric is nylon, 
though a small disk of heavier polyester is used near the 
vent in the apex of the canopy due to higher stresses 
there. The parachute is designed to survive deployment 
at up to Mach 2.2 in the Martian atmosphere and drag 
forces of up to 65,000 pounds. Pioneer Aerospace 
Corp., South Windsor, Conn., made the parachute.
Mounted on the back shell are two antennas — the 
parachute low-gain antenna and the tilted low-gain 
antenna — for communicating directly with Earth using 
X-band frequencies  and another antenna — the para-
chute UHF antenna — for communicating with Mars 
orbiters using an ultra-high frequency (UHF) band. 
Descent Stage
The descent stage of the Mars Science Laboratory does 
its main work during the final few minutes before touch-
down on Mars. It provides rocket-powered deceleration 
and two bands of telecommunications for a phase of the 
arrival at Mars after the phases using the heat shield and 
parachute. After reaching a constant vertical velocity, the 
descent stage lowers the rover on a bridle and continues 
descent until rover touchdown. 
The descent stage uses eight rockets, called Mars land-
er engines (MLE), positioned around its perimeter in four 
pairs. These are the first throttleable engines for a Mars 
landing since the Mars Viking landings in 1976. They 
were built by Aerojet, in Richmond, Wash., with throttle 
valve assemblies from Moog Inc., East Aurora, N.Y. Each 
can provide an adjustable amount of thrust up to about 
742 pounds (3,300 newtons). The propulsion system 
of the descent stage uses pressurized propellant. Three 
spherical fuel tanks provide a usable propellant load of 
about 853 pounds (about 387 kilograms) of hydrazine, 
a propellant that does not require an oxygen source. 
Two spherical tanks of pressurized helium provide pres-
sure for propellant delivery, moderated by a mechanical 
regulator. 
While the rover is fastened to the descent stage, the two 
components together are called the powered descent 
vehicle. The fastenings are pyrotechnic bolts. Firing to 
release these connections commences the spacecraft’s 
sky crane maneuver.
To perform the sky crane maneuver of lowering the 
rover on a bridle, the descent stage carries a device 
called the bridle umbilical and descent rate limiter (BUD). 
This cone-shaped device is about 2 feet (two-thirds of 
a meter) long. Three tethers of the bridle, attached to 
the rover at three points, are spooled around the BUD, 
with enough length to lower the rover about 25 feet (7.5 
meters) below the descent stage during the sky crane 
maneuver. A slightly longer umbilical, with data and 
power connections between the rover and the descent 
stage, is also spooled around the BUD. A descent brake 
in the device governs the rotation rate as the bridle un-
spools, hence the speed at which gravity pulls the rover 
away from the descent stage. The descent brake, made 
by the Starsys division of SpaceDev Inc. (now Sierra 
Nevada Corp.), Poway, Calif., uses gear boxes and 
banks of mechanical resistors engineered to prevent the 
bridle from spooling out too quickly or too slowly. The 
cords of the bridle are made of nylon. The BUD also in-
cludes springs for quickly retracting the loose bridle and 
umbilical after they are severed at the rover end when 
touchdown is detected.
Through the umbilical, the spacecraft’s main computer 
inside the rover controls activities during the entry, 
descent and landing. After the heat shield drops away, 
crucial information for determining the timing of events 
comes to that computer from the terminal descent 
sensor, a radar system engineered and built specifically 
for this mission. The radar, mounted on the descent 
stage, has six disk-shaped antennas oriented at different 
angles. It measures both vertical and horizontal velocity, 
as well as altitude.

PAGE 38
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 38  Press Kit
The descent stage carries an X-band transponder and 
amplifier and two telecommunication antennas: the de-
scent low-gain antenna for communicating directly with 
Earth via X-band transmissions and the descent UHF 
antenna for sending information to Mars orbiters. 
Rover
The Mars Science Laboratory rover, Curiosity, carries the 
instruments of the mission’s 10 science investigations 
plus multiple systems that enable the science payload 
to do its job and send home the results. Key systems 
include six-wheeled mobility, sample acquisition and 
handling with a robotic arm, navigation using stereo im-
aging, a radioisotope power source, avionics, software, 
telecommunications and thermal control. 
The rover’s name was suggested by the winning en-
trant in a national naming contest conducted among 
U.S. school students. More than 9,000 students, 
ages 5 through 18, submitted entries in late 2008 and 
early 2009. An essay by Clara Ma of Lenexa, Kans., a 
12-year-old sixth-grader at the time, was selected by 
NASA in May 2009. 
Curiosity is 10 feet (3 meters) long (not counting its arm), 
9 feet (2.7 meters) wide and 7 feet (2.2 meters) high  
at the top of its mast, with a mass of 1,982 pounds  
(899 kilograms), including 165 pounds (75 kilograms) of 
science instruments. By comparison, each of the previ-
ous generation of Mars rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, is  
5.2 feet (1.6 meters) long, 7.5 feet (2.3 meters) wide and 
4.9 feet (1.5 meters) high, with a mass of 374 pounds 
(170 kilograms), including about 20 pounds (9 kilograms) 
of science instruments.
The science payload is described in the Mars Science 
Laboratory Science Investigations section of this press 
kit.
Curiosity’s mechanical structure provides the basis for 
integrating all of the other rover subsystems and pay-
load instruments. The chassis is the core of the rover. 
With insulated surfaces, it forms the shell of the warm 
electronics box containing the avionics. The mechani-
cal subsystem provides deployments that bring the 
rover to its full functionality, including deployments of the 
remote-sensing mast, robotic arm, antennas and mobil-
ity system.
Rover Mobility
Curiosity’s mobility subsystem is a scaled-up version 
of what was used on the three earlier Mars rovers: 
Sojourner, Spirit and Opportunity. Six wheels all have 
driver motors. The four corner wheels all have steering 
motors. Each front and rear wheel can be independently 
steered, allowing the vehicle to turn in place as well as to 
drive in arcs. The suspension is a rocker-bogie system. 
Combined with a differential connecting the left and right 
sides of the mobility system, the rocker-bogie design en-
ables a six-wheel vehicle to keep all its wheels in contact 
with the ground even on uneven terrain, such as with a 
wheel going over a rock as big as the wheel. On each 
side, a bogie connects the middle and rear wheels and 
provides a pivot point between those wheels. The rocker 
connects the bogie pivot point to the front wheel. The 
rocker’s pivot point connects to the differential across the 
rover body to the rocker on the other side.
Curiosity’s wheels are aluminum, 20 inches (0.5 meter)  
in diameter, which is twice the size of the wheels on  
Spirit and Opportunity. They have cleats for traction 
and for structural support. Curving titanium spokes 
give springy support. The wheels were machined by 
Tapemation, Scotts Valley, Calif. Titanium tubing for the 
suspension system came from Litespeed Titanium, 
Chattanooga, Tenn. 
The drive actuators — each combining an electric mo-
tor and gearbox — are geared for torque, not speed. 
Aeroflex Inc., Plainview, N.Y., built the cold-tolerant actua-
tors for the wheels and other moving parts of Curiosity. 
The rover has a top speed on flat, hard ground of about 
1.5 inches (4 centimeters) per second. However, under 
autonomous control with hazard avoidance, the vehicle 
achieves an average speed of less than half that. The 
rover was designed and built to be capable of driving 
more than 12 miles (more than 20 kilometers) during the 
prime mission. The actual odometry will depend on deci-
sions the science team makes about allocating time for 
driving and time for investigating sites along the way. 
For Curiosity, unlike earlier Mars rovers, the mobility 
system doubles as a landing system, directly absorbing 
the force of impacting the Martian surface at touchdown.  
As on the earlier rovers, the mobility system can also be 
used for digging beneath the surface by rotating one cor-
ner wheel while keeping the other five wheels immobile.

PAGE 39
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 39  Press Kit
RLGA
Antenna
High Gain
Antenna
DAN
Mobility System
RAD
MARDI
Turret
Robotic Arm
REMS
Mastcam
ChemCam RUHF Antenna
MMRTG
(CheMin, SAM inside the rover)
Curiosity Mars Rover
Locations of several science instruments and major subsys-
tems on the NASA Mars rover Curiosity are indicated. These 
include (clockwise from left): Rover Environmental Monitoring 
Station (REMS); Mast Camera (Mastcam); Chemistry and 
Camera (ChemCam); rover ultra high-frequency (RUHF) 
antenna; multi-mission radioisotope thermoelectric generator 
(MMRTG); rover low-gain (RLGA) antenna; high-gain antenna; 
Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons (DAN); mobility system (wheels 
and suspension); Radiation Assessment Detector (RAD); 
Mars Descent Imager (MARDI); turret (see larger image for 
tools on the turret at the end of the robotic arm); and robotic 
arm. Two science instruments — Chemistry and Mineralogy 
(CheMin) and Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM) — are inside 
the body of the rover. 
Rover Arm and Turret 
The turret at the end of the Curiosity’s robotic arm holds 
two science instruments and three other devices. The 
arm places and holds turret-mounted tools on rock and 
soil targets and manipulates the sample-processing 
mechanisms on the turret. It is strong enough to hold 
the 73-pound (33-kilogram) turret at full extension of the 
arm. With the arm extended straight forward, the center 
of the turret is 6.2 feet (1.9 meters) from the front of the 
rover body. The diameter of the turret, including the 
tools mounted on it, is nearly 2 feet (60 centimeters).
The arm has five degrees of freedom of movement 
provided by rotary actuators known as the shoulder 
azimuth joint, shoulder elevation joint, elbow joint, 
wrist joint and turret joint. The Space Division of MDA 
Information Systems Inc. built the arm in Pasadena, 
Calif.

PAGE 40
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 40  Press Kit
The science instruments on the arm’s turret are the 
Mars Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI) and the Alpha Particle 
X-ray Spectrometer (APXS). The other tools on the tur-
ret are components of the rover’s Sample Acquisition/
Sample Processing and Handling (SA/SPaH) sub-
system: the Powder Acquisition Drill System (PADS), 
the Dust Removal Tool (DRT), and the Collection and 
Handling for In-situ Martian Rock Analysis (CHIMRA) 
device. 
The Powder Acquisition Drill System is a rotary per- 
cussive drill to acquire samples of rock material for 
analysis. It can collect a sample from up to 2 inches  
(5 centimeters) beneath a rock’s surface. The diameter 
Drill
APXS
CHIMRA
DRT
MAHLI
Turret of tools at the end of Curiosity’s robotic arm
Locations of tools on the turret that is mounted on Curiosity’s 
arm are indicated. These include (clockwise from upper 
left): the drill for acquiring powdered samples from interiors 
of rocks; the Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer (APXS); 
the sample processing subsystem named Collection and 
Handling for In-Situ Martian Rock Analysis (CHIMRA), 
which includes a scoop for acquiring soil samples; the Dust 
Removal Tool (DRT) for brushing rock surfaces clean; and the 
Mars Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI). 
of the drilled hole is 0.63 inch (1.6 centimeters). The drill 
penetrates the rock and powders the sample to the 
appropriate grain size for use in the two analytical instru-
ments inside the rover: Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM), 
and Chemistry and Mineralogy (CheMin). The powder 
travels up an auger in the drill for transfer to sample 
processing mechanisms. If the drill bit becomes stuck in 
a rock, the drill can disengage from that bit and replace 
it with a spare drill-bit assembly. The arm moves the drill 
to engage and capture one of two spare bits in bit boxes 
mounted to the front of the rover.
The Dust Removal Tool, from Honeybee Robotics, N.Y., 
is a metal-bristle brushing device used to remove the 

PAGE 41
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 41  Press Kit
dust layer from a rock surface or to clean the rover’s 
observation tray. 
 
One portion of the Collection and Handling for In-situ 
Martian Rock Analysis device is a motorized, clamshell-
shaped scoop, 1.57 inches (4 centimeters) wide, to 
collect soil samples from the Martian surface. The other 
turret-mounted portion of this device has chambers 
and labyrinths used for sorting, sieving and portioning 
the samples collected by the drill and the scoop. These 
functions are carried out by manipulating the orienta-
tion of the turret while a vibration device helps move 
material through the chambers, passages and sieves.     
Samples can be sieved to screen out particles more 
than 0.04 inch (1 millimeter) across or to screen out 
particles more than 0.006 inch (150 microns) across. 
The vibration device also aids in creating the appropri-
ate portion size and in the delivery action when the 
device drops material into inlet ports of the analytical 
instruments. Each of the inlet ports — two for Sample 
Analysis at Mars and one for Chemistry and Mineralogy 
— has a cover that can be opened and closed using a 
motor. 
An observation tray on the rover allows the Mars Hand 
Lens Imager and the Alpha Particle X-ray Spectrometer 
a place to examine collected and processed samples of 
soil and powdered rock. 
Rover Power
Rover power is provided by a multi-mission radioisotope 
thermoelectric generator (MMRTG) supplied by the U.S. 
Department of Energy. This generator is essentially a 
nuclear battery that reliably converts heat into electric-
ity. It consists of two major elements: a heat source that 
contains plutonium-238 dioxide and a set of solid-state 
thermocouples that convert the plutonium’s heat energy 
to electricity. It contains 10.6 pounds (4.8 kilograms) of 
plutonium dioxide as the source of the steady supply 
of heat used to produce the onboard electricity and to 
warm the rover’s systems during the frigid Martian night.
Radioisotope thermoelectric generators have enabled 
NASA to explore the solar system for many years. The 
Apollo missions to the moon, the Viking missions to 
Mars, and the Pioneer, Voyager, Ulysses, Galileo, Cassini 
and New Horizons missions to the outer solar system all 
used radioisotope thermoelectric generators. The multi-
mission radioisotope thermoelectric generator is a new 
generation designed to operate on planetary bodies with 
an atmosphere, such as Mars, as well as in the vacuum 
of space. In addition, it is a more flexible modular 
design capable of meeting the needs of a wider variety 
of missions as it generates electrical power in smaller 
increments, slightly more than 110 watts. The design 
goals for the multi-mission radioisotope thermoelectric 
generator include ensuring a high degree of safety,  
optimizing power levels over a minimum lifetime of  
14 years, and minimizing weight. It is about 25 inches 
(64 centimeters) in diameter by 26 inches (66 centime-
ters) long and weighs about 99 pounds (45 kilograms).
Like previous generations of this type of generator, the 
multi-mission radioisotope thermoelectric generator is 
built with several layers of protective material designed 
to contain its plutonium dioxide fuel in a wide range of 
potential accidents, verified through impact testing. In 
the unlikely event of a launch accident, it is unlikely that 
any plutonium would have been released or that any-
one would have been exposed to nuclear material. The 
type of plutonium used in a radioisotope power system 
is different from the material used in weapons and can-
not explode like a bomb. It is manufactured in a ceramic 
form that does not become a significant health hazard 
unless it becomes broken into very fine pieces or vapor-
ized and then inhaled or swallowed. If there had been 
an accident at the launch of Mars Science Laboratory, 
people who might have been exposed would have 
received an average dose of 5 to 10 millirem, equal to 
about a week of background radiation. The average 
American receives 360 millirem of radiation each year 
from natural sources, such as radon and cosmic rays.
The electrical output from the multi-mission radioiso-
tope thermoelectric generator charges two lithium ion 
rechargeable batteries. This enables the power subsys-
tem to meet peak power demands of rover activities 
when the demand temporarily exceeds the generator’s 
steady output level. The batteries, each with a capac-
ity of about 42 amp-hours, were made by Yardney 
Technical Products, Pawcatuck, Conn. They are ex-
pected to go through multiple charge-discharge cycles 
per Martian day.
Rover Telecommunication
Curiosity has three antennas for telecommunication. 
Two are for communications directly with NASA’s Deep 
Space Network antennas on Earth using a radio fre-
quency in the X band (7 to 8 gigahertz). The third is for 
communications with Mars orbiters, using the ultra-high 
frequency (UHF) band (about 400 megahertz).  

PAGE 42
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 42  Press Kit
X-band communications use a 15-watt, solid-state 
power amplifier fed by the rover’s small deep space 
transponder, manufactured by General Dynamics 
Advanced Information Systems, Scottsdale, Ariz. Spain 
provided the rover’s high-gain antenna, which is hex-
agonally shaped, nearly 1 foot (0.3 meter) in diameter 
and mounted near the left edge of the rover deck. With 
this antenna, the X-band subsystem is designed to 
transmit at 160 bits per second or faster to the Deep 
Space Network’s 112-foot-diameter (34-meter-diame-
ter) antennas or at 800 bits per second or faster to the 
Deep Space Network’s 230-foot-diameter (70-meter-
diameter) antennas. The high-gain antenna, which 
requires pointing, can be used for either transmitting or 
receiving. The rover low-gain antenna, which does not 
require pointing, is designed primarily for receiving com-
munications from the Deep Space Network. X-band 
reception through the high-gain antenna is anticipated 
as the typical method for daily uplink of commands to 
the rover.
The rover UHF antenna, a helix-pattern cylinder mount-
ed high near the right-rear corner of Curiosity is fed by 
a pair of redundant Electra-Lite radios, which were built 
through a partnership between NASA’s Jet Propulsion 
Laboratory and L-3 Cincinnati Electronics, Mason, 
Ohio. These radios are software-defined, enabling them 
to autonomously adjust their data rate to suit variations 
in signal strength due to angles and transmission dis-
tance. They use standardized communication protocols 
for interoperability with all the relay orbiters at Mars, and 
are especially compatible with the adaptive Electra UHF 
radio on NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter. The pri-
mary method for the rover’s transmission of data is an-
ticipated to be UHF relay to the Mars Reconnaissance 
Orbiter or Mars Odyssey orbiter during two of the op-
portunities each Martian day when the orbiters pass in 
the sky above the rover. The European Space Agency’s 
Mars Express orbiter also has the capability to serve as 
a backup relay.
Rover Computing
Curiosity has redundant main computers, or rover 
compute elements. Of this “A” and “B” pair, it uses one 
at a time, with the spare held in cold backup. Thus, at a 
given time, the rover is operating from either its “A” side 
or its “B” side. Most rover devices can be controlled by 
either side; a few components, such as the navigation 
camera, have side-specific redundancy themselves. 
The computer inside the rover — whichever side is ac-
tive — also serves as the main computer for the rest of 
the Mars Science Laboratory spacecraft during the flight 
from Earth and arrival at Mars. In case the active com-
puter resets for any reason during the critical minutes 
of entry, descent and landing, a software feature called 
“second chance” has been designed to enable the other 
side to promptly take control, and in most cases, finish 
the landing with a bare-bones version of entry, descent 
and landing instructions.
Each rover compute element contains a radiation-hard-
ened central processor with PowerPC 750 architecture: 
a BAE RAD 750. This processor operates at up to 200 
megahertz speed, compared with 20 megahertz speed 
of the single RAD6000 central processor in each of the 
Mars rovers Spirit and Opportunity. Each of Curiosity’s 
redundant computers has 2 gigabytes of flash memory 
(about eight times as much as Spirit or Opportunity), 
256 megabytes of dynamic random access memory 
and 256 kilobytes of electrically erasable programmable 
read-only memory.
The Mars Science Laboratory flight software monitors 
the status and health of the spacecraft during all phases 
of the mission, checks for the presence of commands 
to execute, performs communication functions and con-
trols spacecraft activities. The spacecraft was launched 
with software adequate to serve for the landing and for 
operations on the surface of Mars, as well as during 
the flight from Earth to Mars. The months after launch 
were used, as planned, to develop and test improved 
flight software versions. One upgraded version was 
sent to the spacecraft in May 2012 and installed onto 
its computers in May and June. This version includes 
improvements for entry, descent and landing.  Another 
was sent to the spacecraft in June and will be installed 
on the rover’s computers a few days after landing, with 
improvements for driving the rover and using its robotic 
arm. 
Rover Navigation
Two sets of engineering cameras on the rover — 
Navigation cameras (Navcams) up high and Hazard-
Avoidance cameras (Hazcams) down low — will inform 
operational decisions both by Curiosity’s onboard 
autonomy software and by the rover team on Earth. 
Information from these cameras is used for autonomous 
navigation, engineers’ calculations for maneuvering the 
robotic arm and scientists’ decisions about pointing the 
remote-sensing science instruments.

PAGE 43
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 43  Press Kit
Curiosity’s Navcams and Hazcams generate grayscale 
images that cover red wavelengths centered at about 
650 nanometers. The cameras themselves are virtu-
ally identical to the engineering cameras on Spirit and 
Opportunity, though Curiosity has redundant cameras 
and slightly more powerful heaters for the cameras. 
Curiosity has a total of 12 engineering cameras, each 
weighing about 9 ounces (250 grams).
Curiosity’s Navcams, paired for stereo imaging, are 
installed next to the science payload’s Mast Camera on 
the remote-sensing mast. Curiosity carries two stereo 
pairs of Navcams, one pair each connected to the 
rover’s two redundant computers. The Navcams that 
are controlled by and feed imagery to the “A” computer 
are mounted directly above the ones linked to the “B” 
computer. That puts the “A” pair about 6.5 feet (1.99 
meters) above the ground when the rover is on hard, 
flat terrain and the cameras are pointed straight out 
(slightly lower when pointed downward), and the other 
pair 2 inches (5 centimeters) lower. The left and right 
cameras in each pair are about 16.5 inches (42 centi-
meters) apart, giving them approximately twice as long 
a stereo baseline as the separation distance of naviga-
tion cameras on Spirit and Opportunity.
Each of the Navcams captures a square field of view  
45 degrees wide and tall, comparable to the field of 
view of a 37-millimeter-focal-length lens on a 35-mil-
limeter, single-lens reflex camera. The lens focuses 
the image onto a 1,024-pixel-by-1,024-pixel area of a 
charge-coupled device (CCD) detector. This yields a 
resolution of 0.82 milliradians per pixel — for example, 
0.8 inch (2 centimeters) per pixel at a distance of  
82 feet (25 meters), enough to resolve a golf ball at that 
distance as a circle about two Navcam pixels wide. 
The depth of field achieved by the fixed-aperture f/12 
Navcams keeps anything in focus from a distance of 
about 20 inches (0.5 meter) to infinity.
Curiosity has four pairs of Hazcams: two redundant 
pairs on the front of the chassis and two redundant 
pairs on the rear. The rover can drive backwards as 
well as forward, so both the front and rear Hazcams 
can be used for detecting potential obstacles in the 
rover’s driving direction. The front Hazcams also provide 
three-dimensional information for planning motions of 
the rover’s robotic arm, such as positioning of the drill or 
scoop for collecting samples. 
Each Hazcam has a fisheye lens providing a square field 
of view 124 degrees wide and tall. The depth of field in 
focus spans from about 4 inches (10 centimeters) to 
infinity. Resolution of the Hazcams is 2.1 milliradians per 
pixel on the same type of detector as in the Navcams. 
At a distance of 33 feet (10 meters), the Hazcam resolu-
tion is 0.8 inch (2 centimeters) per pixel. A golf ball at 
that distance would be approximately two Hazcam 
pixels across.
The redundant pairs of Hazcams are mounted side by 
side. On the front, each stereo pair has a baseline of 
6.54 inches (16.6 centimeters) between the center of its 
left eye and center of its right eye. Both the pair linked to 
the rover’s “A” computer and the pair linked to the “B” 
computer are mounted near the bottom center of the 
front face of the chassis, about 27 inches (68 centime-
ters) above ground level. The rear stereo pairs each have 
a baseline of 3.9 inches (10 centimeters), the same as 
for both the front and rear hazard-identification cameras 
on Spirit and Opportunity. The rear “A” pair on Curiosity 
is toward the port side of the rear face of the vehicle (on 
the left if a viewer were standing behind the rover and 
looking toward it). The rear “B” pair is on the right, or 
toward starboard. Both pairs are about 31 inches (78 
centimeters) above ground level.
Curiosity’s Hazcams have one-time-removable lens cov-
ers to shield them from potential dust raised during the 
rover’s landing. Pyrotechnic devices will remove the lens 
caps after landing. The Navcams gain protection from 
the stowed position of the remote-sensing mast during 
the landing; they do not have lens covers.
Different navigation modes for rover drives use im-
ages from the engineering cameras in different ways. 
Techniques include “blind” driving, hazard avoidance 
and visual odometry. The set of commands developed 
by rover planners for a single day’s drive may include a 
combination of these modes.
When using the blind-drive mode, rover planners have 
sufficient local imaging from the engineering cameras or 
Mast Camera to determine that a safe path exists, free 
of obstacles or hazards. They command the rover to 
drive a certain distance in a certain direction. In a blind 
drive, the rover’s computer calculates distance solely 
from wheel rotation; one full turn of a wheel with no slip-
page is about 62 inches (157 centimeters) of driving. It 
does not check imagery from the engineering cameras 
to assess the slippage.

PAGE 44
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 44  Press Kit
When the rover planners cannot determine that a path 
is free of obstacles, they can command driving that 
uses hazard avoidance. Besides using this hazard 
avoidance in rougher terrain, they might use it for an ad-
ditional segment of driving beyond a blind drive on the 
same day. Hazard avoidance requires the rover to stop 
frequently to acquire new stereo imaging in the drive 
direction with the engineering cameras and analyze the 
images for potential hazards. The rover makes decisions 
based on its analysis of the three-dimensional informa-
tion provided by the stereo imaging. Rover planners set 
variables such as how frequently to stop and check, 
which cameras to use, and what type of decision the 
rover makes in response to a hazard detection (whether 
to choose a path around it or stop driving for the day).
Hazard avoidance can be supplemented with visual 
odometry. Visual odometry uses Navcam images made 
with the cameras pointed to the side of the route being 
driven. By pausing at intervals during the drive to take 
these images, the rover can compare the before-and-
after situation for each segment of the drive. It can 
recognize features in the images and calculate how far it 
has actually traveled during the intervening drive seg-
ment. Any difference between that distance and the dis-
tance indicated from wheel rotation is an indication that 
the wheels are slipping against the ground. In the day’s 
set of driving commands, rover planners can set the 
intervals at which the rover pauses for visual-odometry 
checks, as suited to the type of terrain being traversed. 
A slip limit can be set so that if the rover calculates that 
it is slipping in excess of that amount, it will stop driving 
for the day. The mode of using visual odometry checks 
at intervals several times the rover’s own length is called 
slip-check, to differentiate it from full-time visual odom-
etry with sideways-looking stops as frequently as a frac-
tion of the rover’s length.
Navigation modes differ significantly in the fraction of 
time spent with wheels in motion versus stopped for 
imaging and analysis of the images. 
Curiosity can incorporate other safety features in each 
drive, such as tilt limits.  The rover’s inertial measure-
ment unit, which incorporates gyroscopes, provides 
information about changes in tilt. This and other infor-
mation about the rover’s attitude, or orientation, serve 
in use of the arm and the science instruments, and in 
pointing the high-gain antenna, as well as in navigation.
Rover Thermal
Curiosity’s thermal control system was designed to 
enable the rover to operate far from the equator so that 
	  
Rover size, compared with a 5-foot, 8-inch man

PAGE 45
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 45  Press Kit
the mission would have a choice of landing sites based 
on science criteria. In a range of Mars surface tempera-
tures from minus 207 degrees Fahrenheit (minus 133 
degrees Celsius) to 81 degrees Fahrenheit (27 degrees 
Celsius), the temperature-sensitive components inside 
the rover can be maintained between minus 40 de-
grees Fahrenheit (minus 40 degrees Celsius) and 122 
degrees Fahrenheit (50 degrees Celsius).  
The rover’s heat rejection system has a pumped-
fluid loop that can deliver heat from the multi-mission 
radioisotope thermoelectric generator when the core 
electronics need heating and take heat away from the 
core if the rover is becoming too warm. Pacific Design 
Technologies Inc., Goleta, Calif., built the pump. 
The fluid loop runs through an avionics mounting plate 
inside the insulated warm electronics box of the rover 
chassis. The multi-mission radioisotope thermoelectric 
generator cools passively with its radiator fins when its 
heat is not needed for warming the rover. For heat-
ing needs beyond the circulation of the heat rejection 
system, the rover uses electrical heaters. These enable 
flexibility in localizing and timing for the heat they pro-
vide. For example, a secondary warm electronics box 
atop the remote sensing mast uses electrical heating to 
maintain temperatures there above allowable minimums.
‘Send Your Name to Mars’ Chips
Silicon chips mounted onto Curiosity’s deck bear the 
names of people who participated in the “Send Your 
Name to Mars” program online. Each chip is about the 
size of a dime. More than 1.24 million names were sub-
mitted online. These names have been etched into sili-
con using an electron-beam machine used for fabricat-
ing microdevices at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. In 
addition, more than 20,000 visitors to JPL and NASA’s 
Kennedy Space Center wrote their names on pages 
that have been scanned and reproduced at microscopic 
scale on another chip. 

PAGE 46
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 46  Press Kit
The Mars Science Laboratory mission will place the 
rover Curiosity at the foot of a mountain of sedimentary 
strata, or layers, inside Gale Crater. The landing site at 
4.6 degrees south latitude, 137.4 degrees east longi-
tude will give the rover access to a field site with science 
targets both on the crater floor beside the mountain and 
in the lower layers of the mountain.
Gale Crater spans 96 miles (154 kilometers) in diameter, 
giving it an area about the equivalent of Connecticut and 
Rhode Island combined. It holds a mound, informally 
named Mount Sharp, rising about 3 miles (5 kilometers) 
above the crater floor, which is higher than Mt. Rainier 
rises above Seattle. The slopes of Mount Sharp are 
gentle enough for Curiosity to climb, though during the 
prime mission of one Martian year (98 weeks), the rover 
will probably not go beyond some particularly intriguing 
layers near the base.
Gale sits at a low elevation relative to most of the surface 
of Mars, suggesting that if Mars ever had much flow-
Curiosity’s Landing Site
ing water, some of it would have pooled inside Gale. 
Observations from orbit that add evidence of a wet 
history include water-related clay and sulfate minerals 
in the lower layers of the mound, and textures higher 
on the mound where it appears that mineral-saturated 
groundwater filled fractures and deposited minerals.
Stratification in the mound suggests it is the surviving 
remnant of an extensive sequence of deposits that 
were laid down after the impact that excavated the 
crater more than 3 billion years ago. Each geological 
layer, called a stratum, is formed after the layer beneath 
it and before the one above it. The stack of layers that 
forms Mount Sharp offers a history book of sequential 
chapters recording environmental conditions when 
each stratum was deposited. This is the same principle 
of geology that makes the strata exposed in Arizona’s 
Grand Canyon a record of environmental history on 
Earth. For more than 150 years, geologists on Earth 
have used stacks of strata from globally dispersed loca-
tions to piece together a record of Earth history. 
Locations of landing sites for Curiosity and previous Mars rovers and landers

PAGE 47
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 47  Press Kit
Mount Sharp’s stack of layers is much taller than the 
stack admired in the Grand Canyon. It is a closer 
match to the amount of layering exposed in Mars’ 
Valles Marineris, the largest canyon in our solar system. 
Therefore, Mount Sharp may offer one of the thickest 
continuous sequences of strata in the solar system. On 
Earth, the thickest sequences of strata that also contain 
a diversity of materials are the best records of Earth’s his-
tory. Like the most complete copy of an ancient manu-
script, they can be used to decode and tie together less 
complete records from around the globe. It is hoped that 
the record at Gale Crater will be just such a key reference 
for deciphering Mars’ global history. 
Gale Crater was named in 1991 for Australian as-
tronomer and banker Walter F. Gale (1865–1945), who 
discovered several comets and drew maps of Mars and 
Jupiter. Coincidentally, the mound inside Gale, when 
viewed from orbit, resembles the shape of Australia. 
Curiosity’s Project Science Group chose the informal 
name Mount Sharp in early 2012 as a tribute to geolo-
gist Robert P . Sharp (1911–2004). Sharp was a founder 
of the field of planetary science, an influential teacher of 
many current leaders in the field, and team member for 
NASA’s first few Mars missions. He taught geology at the 
California Institute of Technology (Caltech), in Pasadena, 
from 1948 until past his retirement.  
NASA’s choice of the landing site in Gale Crater in July 
2011 followed a five-year process that considered about 
60 sites and involved about 150 Mars scientists in a 
series of public workshops. Four finalist sites identified in 
2008 were mapped and examined so extensively from 
orbit that they have become four of the best-studied 
places on Mars. The detail in images taken by the High 
Resolution Imaging Science Experiment camera on 
NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, for example, 
reveals virtually every individual boulder big enough 
to spoil a landing. Mineral mapping by the Compact 
Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer on the same 
orbiter and the OMEGA spectrometer on the European 
Space Agency’s Mars Express identified mineral evi-
dence of wet histories at all four sites. All four finalist sites 
qualified as safe for landing, so the selection could be 
made based on the sites’ scientific appeal.
The guided entry technology enabling the Mars Science 
Laboratory to land more precisely than previous Mars 
missions, coupled with Curiosity’s driving capability, 
meant that, for the first time, the main science destina-
tion for a Mars mission could be outside of the area that 
needed to qualify as safe for landing. The mission’s tech-
nologies for atmospheric entry, descent and landing give 
the spacecraft about a 99-percent probability of landing 
within an ellipse 12.4 miles (20 kilometers) by 15.5 miles 
(25 kilometers), as calculated during the site-selection 
process. That is about one-third the size of the landing 
ellipses for Mars rovers that landed in 2004. Curiosity 
was designed and built to be able to drive far enough to 
get outside of its landing ellipse during its prime mis-
sion. While Curiosity was on its way from Earth to Mars, 
continuing analysis of the entry, descent and landing 
variables led to confidence in even higher precision.  
This enabled shrinking the landing ellipse to about 4 by 
12 miles (7 by 20 kilometers) and moving the center 
target closer to Mount Sharp.
The slopes of Mount Sharp are too steep for the rover 
to land safely on the mountain. The science targets 
initially identified for the rover to investigate are in the 
lower layers of the mountain, requiring the rover to drive 
outside the landing ellipse to get to the science targets. 
Subsequent observations and analysis have identified 
additional science targets within the landing ellipse. 
The pace at which Curiosity gets to the features of high 
science interest inside and outside of the ellipse will 
depend on findings and decisions made after landing, 
including the possibility of identifying targets not yet 
known. Getting to key destinations at lower layers of 
Mount Sharp may take a large fraction of the 98-week 
prime mission. The route may involve navigation through 
some challenging terrains such as sand dunes, hills and 
canyons.
In Curiosity’s field site — encompassing accessible ar-
eas inside and outside of the landing ellipse — features 
that make Gale appealing to the science team include:
•	 An alluvial fan extending into the landing ellipse from 
the crater wall to the north holds material shed from 
the crater wall and likely carried by water. 
•	 Down slope, or southward, from the alluvial fan lies 
an exposure of hard, light-toned rock. The min-
eral composition of this area is unidentified so far. 
Curiosity could investigate a hypothesis that this 
exposure is sedimentary rock formed in interaction 
with water, such as salts left by the drying of a lake. 
Some relatively fresh, small craters in this part of the 
crater floor may provide access to material that has 
not experienced long exposure to the radiation envi-
ronment affecting chemistry at the Martian surface. 

PAGE 48
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 48  Press Kit
Curiosity’s landing area and surrounding terrain at Gale Crater, looking toward the southeast
Landing ellipse in Gale Crater, in overhead view with north at the top

PAGE 49
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 49  Press Kit
Curiosity’s landing area and surrounding terrain at Gale Crater, looking toward the southeast
•	 Among the exposures in the lower portion of Mount 
Sharp are packages of strata that contain clay min-
erals, strata that contain sulfate salts and strata that 
contain both. Clays and sulfates both result from 
wet environments. The differences in mineral com-
position from one package of strata to the next can 
provide information about changes in environments 
that may have been favorable for microbial life. 
•	 Curiosity’s analysis of the exposed minerals will 
provide confirmation of orbiter-based predictions for 
the distribution and abundance of similar minerals 
to be present over vast parts of Mars. In this regard, 
Curiosity will provide important ground truth of hy-
potheses generated by previous missions.
•	 The sulfate salts retain trace amounts of water in 
their mineral structure. Curiosity can monitor how 
some of that water is released into the atmosphere 
during warmer hours of the day and reabsorbed by 
the salts during colder hours. These measurements 
would provide information about the modern water 
cycle on Mars. 
•	 Canyons cut into the northern flank of Mount Sharp 
resulted from flow of water long after the lower lay-
ers of the mountain had accumulated. The canyon- 
cutting environment could have been a separate 
habitable environment from the environment at 
the time the clay-containing and sulfate-containing 
layers formed. Analysis of material deposited at the 
mouths of the canyons could provide information 
about that later environment. 
•	 Extensive networks of fractures in the upper parts of 
the sulfate-bearing strata are filled with minerals that 
betray circulation of groundwater. These fracture 
networks would represent yet a different, subsurface 
habitable environment. The presence of minerals 
lining these fractures indicates where Curiosity might 
conduct analyses to look for organic compounds.
One important capability of Curiosity’s science payload 
is to check for the presence of ingredients for life, includ-
ing the carbon-based building blocks of biology called 
organic compounds. Long-term preservation of organic 
compounds requires special conditions. 
Clays and sulfate-rich deposits such as the ones 
Curiosity will investigate in Gale Crater can be good at 
latching onto organic chemicals and protecting them 
from oxidation. Another factor in long-term preservation 
of organics on Mars is protection from natural radiation 
that is more intense than what reaches Earth’s surface. 
Radiation may gradually destroy organics inside rocks 
at the surface, but Gale also offers rocks exposed by 
relatively recent small-crater impacts.
Gale offers these attractive targets at which to check for 
organic compounds. Finding organics is still a long shot, 
but this chosen field site also offers records of multiple 
periods in Mars history, grist for the mission’s investiga-
tion of environmental changes on Mars, with strong 
prospects for identifying habitable environments. 
Should Curiosity continue to be in working condition 
following the prime mission, an extended mission could 
continue the investigation by exploring higher, younger 
layers of Mount Sharp.
Landing ellipse in Gale Crater, in overhead view with north at the top

PAGE 50
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 50  Press Kit
Building on scientific discoveries and lessons from 
past and ongoing missions, NASA’s Mars Exploration 
Program is working to establish a sustained observa-
tional presence at Mars. This includes orbiters that view 
the planet from above and act as telecommunications 
relays, surface-based mobile laboratories, robots that 
probe below the planet’s surface, and, ultimately, mis-
sions that return soil and rock samples to Earth and 
prepare for human landing. 
With international cooperation, the long-term program is 
guided by compelling questions about Mars and de-
veloping technologies to make missions possible with 
available resources. The program’s strategy is to seek to 
uncover profound insights into Mars’ past and present 
environments, the roles and abundance of water, and 
the potential for past or present habitats suitable for the 
existence of life. 
The following are the most recently completed, ongoing 
and near-term future Mars missions of exploration by 
NASA and its international partners: 
Mars Pathfinder (December 1996 – March 1998): 
The first completed mission in NASA’s Discovery 
Program of low-cost planetary missions with highly 
focused scientific goals, Mars Pathfinder set ambitious 
objectives and surpassed them. This lander released 
its Sojourner rover on the Martian surface and returned 
2.3 billion bits of information from instruments on the 
lander and the rover. The information included more 
than 17,000 images, more than 15 chemical analyses of 
rocks and soil, and extensive data on winds and other 
aspects of weather. The observations suggest that early 
Mars may have been more Earth-like with liquid water on 
its surface and a thicker atmosphere than it has today. 
The mission functioned on the Martian surface for about 
three months, well beyond the planned lifetimes of  
30 days for the lander and seven days for the rover. 
Mars Global Surveyor (November 1996 –
November 2006): During its primary mapping mission 
from March 1999 through January 2001, NASA’s Mars 
Global Surveyor collected more information than any 
previous Mars project. The orbiter continued to examine 
Mars’ surface and monitor its global weather patterns 
through three mission extensions, successfully operat-
ing longer than any previous spacecraft sent to Mars. It 
Recent, Current and Upcoming Missions
had begun a fourth extension and was five days shy of 
the 10th anniversary of its launch when it last communi-
cated with Earth. Mars Global Surveyor returned more 
than 240,000 camera images, 206 million spectrometer 
measurements and 671 million laser-altimeter shots.  
Some of the mission’s most significant findings include: 
discovering extensive layering of the planet’s crust; 
discovering ancient deltas; discovering channels, a few 
of which exhibit modern activity suggesting modern 
liquid water; identifying concentrations of a mineral that 
often forms under wet conditions, leading to selection of 
one large deposit as the landing area for NASA’s Mars 
Exploration Rover Opportunity; laser-altimeter obser-
vations producing a nearly global map of the planet’s 
topography, quantifying altitudes and slopes, and 
characterizing myriad craters, including many eroded or 
buried craters too subtle for previous observation; com-
piling extensive evidence for the role of dust in reshaping 
the recent Martian environment; and detecting localized 
remnant magnetic fields, proof that Mars once had a 
global magnetic field like Earth’s, shielding the surface 
from deadly cosmic rays and slowing loss of volatiles 
to space. This orbiter provided details used to evaluate 
the risks and attractions of potential landing sites for 
the Phoenix Mars Lander and the two Mars Exploration 
Rovers. It also served as a communications relay for the 
Mars Exploration Rovers during and after their landings. 
Mars Odyssey (April 2001 – present): This NASA 
orbiter’s prime mapping mission began in March 2002. 
Its suite of gamma-ray spectrometer instruments soon 
provided strong evidence for large quantities of frozen 
water mixed into the top layer of soil in the 20 percent of 
the planet near its north and south poles. Subsequently, 
a site in this permafrost terrain became the destina-
tion for the Phoenix Mars Lander. Odyssey’s camera 
system, which examines the planet in both visible-light 
and infrared wavelengths, has identified minerals in 
rocks and soils and has compiled the highest-resolution 
global map of Mars. Nighttime infrared imaging provides 
information about how quickly or slowly surface features 
cool off after sunset, which gives an indication of where 
the surface is rocky and where it is dusty. Odyssey’s 
instruments have monitored the Mars atmosphere for 
more than a decade, including the tracking of non-con-
densable gases such as argon as tracers of atmospher-
ic transport. Odyssey has also monitored high-energy 
radiation at orbital altitudes to help characterize the en-

PAGE 51
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 51  Press Kit
vironment that future missions, including possible human 
ones, will experience. Odyssey’s observations helped 
evaluate potential landing sites for the Mars Exploration 
Rovers, Phoenix and Curiosity. Relays via this orbiter 
have been the main way for the rovers and Phoenix to 
send information to Earth; more than 95 percent of rover 
data has been returned via this communications work-
horse. Odyssey is now the longest-working spacecraft 
ever sent to Mars. It will continue to map the planet while 
providing relay support for Curiosity. 
Mars Exploration Rover Spirit (June 2003 – March 
2010): The first of NASA’s twin Mars Exploration Rovers 
to land on Mars, Spirit was a mobile robotic field geolo-
gist sent to examine clues about the planet’s environ-
mental history — particularly the history of water — at a 
carefully selected site. Each rover’s mission was planned 
to run for three months on Mars, but each rover worked 
for years. Spirit explored inside Gusev Crater, a highly 
eroded crater 95 miles (150 kilometers) in diameter. 
Orbital images suggested Gusev may have once held a 
lake fed by inflow from a large valley network funneling 
into the crater from highlands to the south. Spirit landed 
Jan. 4, 2004, on a flat volcanic flood-plain pocked 
with small craters and strewn with loose rocks. There, 
the rover found basaltic rocks only slightly altered by 
exposure to moisture. By June 2004, well into its first 
extended mission, Spirit had driven to a range named 
the Columbia Hills, about 1.6 miles (2.6 kilometers) from 
the landing site, in a quest to find exposed bedrock. 
Exploring in the hills, Spirit discovered a profusion of 
rocks and soils bearing evidence of extensive exposure 
to water, including the iron-oxide-hydroxide mineral 
goethite and hydrated sulfate salts. It found an outcrop 
rich in carbonate, evidence for wet conditions that were 
not acidic. Textures and compositions of materials at 
a low plateau between hills indicated an early era on 
Mars when water and hot rocks interacted in explosive 
volcanism. By driving with one immobile wheel whose 
motor had worn out after three years on Mars, Spirit 
serendipitously plowed up a hidden deposit of nearly 
pure silica. This discovery indicates that the site once 
had hot springs or steam vents, which are environments 
that, on Earth, teem with microbial life. In June 2009, 
Spirit became embedded in a patch of fine-grained 
material and was unable to extract itself after a second 
wheel stopped working. Prevented from parking itself in 
a position favorable for its solar array to generate energy, 
Spirit was apparently unable to survive the long southern 
winter, as no further communications were received.
Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity (July 2003 
- present): This rover was sent to a flat region named 
Meridiani Planum, where the spectrometer on Mars 
Global Surveyor had discovered a large exposure of the 
mineral hematite — which often forms in the presence 
of water. On Jan. 25, 2004, Opportunity landed inside a 
crater only 72 feet (22 meters) in diameter and immedi-
ately saw exposed bedrock in the crater’s inner slope. 
During the next few weeks, the rover’s examination 
of that outcrop settled the long-running debate about 
whether Mars ever had sustained liquid water on its sur-
face. Composition and textures showed that the rocks 
not only had been saturated with water, but had actually 
been laid down under gently flowing surface water. 
For six months beginning in June 2004, Opportunity 
examined deeper layers of rock inside a stadium-size 
crater, Endurance, about half a mile (700 meters) from 
the landing site. The wall-rock layers had all soaked in 
water, but textures in some showed that periods of dry, 
wind-blown deposition alternated with periods when 
water covered the surface. After examining its own jet-
tisoned heat shield and a nickel-iron meteorite near this 
crater, Opportunity drove more than 4 miles (6 kilome-
ters) southward to reach an even larger and deeper 
crater, Victoria. Here, it examined geological evidence 
of similar environmental conditions from a greater span 
of time. The presence of sulfur-rich material throughout 
Opportunity’s study area indicates acidic watery envi-
ronments. In mid-2008, Opportunity set off toward a 
crater 14 miles (22 kilometers) in diameter, Endeavour, 
where orbital observations have detected water-related 
clay minerals, different from any Opportunity has seen 
so far and indicative of less-acidic watery environments. 
In August 2011, with a total driving odometry of more 
than 21 miles (34 kilometers), the rover reached the rim 
of Endeavour Crater to start a new phase of its explora-
tion of Mars. There it found water-deposited veins of 
gypsum, demonstrating once more the value of mobility 
and longevity.
Mars Express (June 2003 – present): This is a 
European Space Agency orbiter with NASA participa-
tion in two of its seven investigations: a ground-pene-
trating radar, and a tool for studying how the solar wind 
removes water vapor from Mars’ outer atmosphere. 
The spacecraft has been returning color stereo images 
and other data since January 2004 after entering orbit 
in late December 2003. Its spectrometer for visible 
and near-infrared wavelengths found deposits of clay 
minerals indicating a long-ago wet environment that 
was less acidic than the one that produced the miner-
als studied by Opportunity. Scientists working with this 

PAGE 52
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 52  Press Kit
and similar data from the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter 
have proposed a sequence of globally distributed water 
environments very early in Mars’ history, moving from 
less to more acidic environments. Meanwhile, scientists 
working with data from a thermal infrared spectrometer 
found indications of methane in Mars’ atmosphere by 
averaging millions of spectra to improve signal-to-noise 
ratio. Scientists presently believe that this gas would 
break down too rapidly to be detectable unless there 
is an active source, either biological or non-biological, 
maintaining its concentration in the atmosphere. These 
discoveries have important implications for the habitabil-
ity of Mars, past and present. Since deployment of the 
radar antenna in June 2005, the spacecraft has exam-
ined ice-rich layered deposits covering the polar regions.  
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (August 2005 – 
present): This multipurpose spacecraft is examining the 
surface, subsurface and atmosphere of Mars in unprec-
edented detail. It began its primary science investigations 
in November 2006, following 426 carefully planned dips 
into the top of Mars’ atmosphere to adjust the size and 
shape of its orbit after arriving at Mars in March 2006. 
Specifically engineered to return the vast volumes of data 
generated by the high spatial resolution of its imaging 
cameras and spectrometer, the orbiter has returned 
more than three times as much data as the combined 
total from all other space missions that have traveled 
farther than the moon. NASA’s Deep Space Network 
antennas received more than 130 terabytes of data — 
including more than 70,000 images — from the six sci-
ence instruments on Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter dur-
ing the mission’s first five years at Mars. The mission has 
illuminated three very different periods of Mars’ history. Its 
observations show that different types of watery environ-
ments formed extensive deposits of water-related miner-
als — including clays, sulfates and carbonates — across 
the planet early in Mars’ history. In more recent times, 
water appears to have cycled as a gas between polar 
ice deposits and lower-latitude deposits of ice and snow. 
Radar observations reveal internal, episodic patterns of 
layering probably connected to cyclical variations in the 
tilt of the planet’s rotation axis and the elliptical nature of 
its orbit. These cycles modulate the solar heating of the 
poles to a much larger degree than occurs for Earth, 
with its ice ages, over periods of thousands to a few 
million years. Radar has also revealed a thick deposit of 
carbon-dioxide ice buried in the south polar cap, which, 
if released into the atmosphere, would nearly double 
the amount of gas in the atmosphere today. With ob-
servations of new craters, avalanches and dust storms 
occurring even now, the orbiter has shown that modern 
Mars is still a dynamic world. The orbiter’s observations 
have identified sites with high potential for future scien-
tific discovery. In addition, the orbiter’s high-resolution 
cameras can reveal hazards to landing and roving 
spacecraft, such as rocks and steep slopes, while its 
atmospheric monitors characterize the environment that 
can be encountered during landing and operations on 
the surface. Observations by the Mars Reconnaissance 
Orbiter enabled the Phoenix mission to choose a land-
ing site less rocky than one previously considered. The 
orbiter has examined potential landing sites for Mars 
Science Laboratory and will serve as a relay asset during 
the landing and surface operations of Curiosity.  
Phoenix Mars Lander (August 2007 – November 
2008): In 2001, NASA announced a new program of 
competitively proposed and selected missions to Mars: 
Mars Scout missions. The Phoenix Mars Lander pro-
posal, submitted by a team led by Peter Smith of the 
University of Arizona, Tucson, was selected out of 25 
proposals in 2003 to be the one developed for launch in 
2007. The mission sent a stationary lander with a robotic 
digging arm and suite of science instruments to study 
the summer environment in a far-northern zone. Phoenix 
confirmed and examined deposits of underground water 
ice detected from orbit by Mars Odyssey. It identified a 
mineral called calcium carbonate that suggested occa-
sional presence of thawed water. The lander also found 
soil chemistry with significant implications for life and ob-
served falling snow. The mission’s biggest surprise was 
the discovery of perchlorate, an oxidizing chemical on 
Earth that is food for some microbes and potentially toxic 
for others, and which can lower the freezing point of 
liquid water by tens of degrees. It completed its planned 
three months of operation on Mars and worked two 
extra months before the anticipated seasonal decline in 
solar energy at its high latitude ended the mission.  
Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution 
Mission, or MAVEN (for launch in 2013): The sec-
ond Mars Scout mission, selected from 26 competitive 
proposals in 2007, will explore the planet’s upper atmo-
sphere, ionosphere and interactions with the sun and 
solar wind. Various evidence suggests that Mars was a 
wetter planet early in its history. Where has that water 
gone? Scientists will use MAVEN data to determine the 
role that loss of volatile compounds, such as carbon 
dioxide and water, from the Mars atmosphere to space 
has played through time, giving insight into the history 
of Mars’ atmosphere and climate, liquid water, and 
planetary habitability. The principal investigator is Bruce 
Jakosky, University of Colorado, Boulder.

PAGE 53
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 53  Press Kit
Beyond 2016: In early 2012, NASA announced an ini-
tiative to develop a strategy for NASA’s Mars Exploration 
Program in light of new funding constraints. The initial 
focus is on a possible 2018–2020 robotic mission that 
will not only conduct important science, but will incorpo-
rate objectives and goals of NASA’s human exploration 
and technology programs. NASA solicited ideas to be 
incorporated into the planning process for Mars explora-
tion, and more than 400 concepts and abstracts were 
submitted for presentation at a June 2012 public con-
ference at the Lunar and Planetary Institute in Houston. 
The Mars Program Planning Group, an independent 
group formed to develop concepts and approaches 
for future exploration of Mars for NASA, is considering 
inputs from the conference and taking into consideration 
budgetary, programmatic, scientific and technical con-
straints. This group will submit a report to NASA in late 
summer. NASA will use it to create a reformulated Mars 
Exploration Program, which will be reflected in the presi-
dent’s Fiscal Year 2014 budget request to be released 
in February 2013. The reformulated Mars program 
is expected to advance the intentions in the National 
Research Council’s decadal survey for planetary sci-
ence, which puts Mars sample return as a top scientific 
priority. The planning initiative also considers related 
objectives of NASA’s Office of the Chief Technologist 
and NASA’s Human Exploration and Operations Mission 
Directorate. The Mars program will incorporate elements 
of advanced research and technologies in support of 
a logical sequence of missions to answer fundamental 
scientific questions and ultimately support future human 
exploration of Mars. 

PAGE 54
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 54  Press Kit
Mars Science: A Story of Changes
As the world in 1965 eagerly awaited results of the first 
spacecraft flyby of Mars, everything we knew about the 
Red Planet was based on what sparse details could be 
gleaned by peering at it from telescopes on Earth. Since 
the early 1900s, popular culture had been enlivened by 
the notion of a habitable neighboring world crisscrossed 
by canals and, possibly, inhabited by advanced life 
forms that might have built them — whether friendly or 
not. Astronomers were highly skeptical about the ca-
nals, which looked more dubious the closer they looked. 
About the only hard information they had on Mars was 
that they could see it had seasons with ice caps that 
waxed and waned, along with seasonally changing 
surface markings. By breaking down the light from Mars 
into colors, they learned that its atmosphere was thin 
and dominated by an unbreathable gas, carbon dioxide.
The past four decades have revolutionized that view. 
First, hopes of a lush, Earth-like world were deflated 
when Mariner 4’s flyby on July 15, 1965, revealed large 
impact craters, like craters that cover Earth’s barren, life-
less moon. Those holding out for Martians were further 
discouraged when NASA’s two Viking landers were sent 
to the surface in 1976 equipped with a suite of chem-
istry experiments that turned up no conclusive sign of 
biological activity. Mars as we came to know it was cold, 
nearly airless and bombarded by hostile radiation from 
both the sun and from deep space.
Since then, however, new possibilities of a more hospi-
table Martian past have emerged. Mars is a much more 
complex body than Earth’s moon. Scientists scrutinizing 
pictures from the orbiters of the 1970s detected surface 
features potentially shaped by liquid water, perhaps 
even the shoreline of an ancient ocean. Eight successful 
Mars missions since the mid-1990s have advanced the 
story. Accumulated evidence shows that the surface of 
Mars appears to be shaped by flowing water in hun-
dreds of places; that some Mars rocks formed in water; 
that significant amounts of water as ice and in hydrated 
minerals still make up a fraction of the top surface layer 
of Mars in many areas; and that water may, even today, 
occasionally emerge from the ground to flow briefly 
before freezing or evaporating. 
Although it appears unlikely that complex organisms 
similar to advanced life on Earth could have existed 
on Mars’ comparatively hostile surface, scientists are 
intrigued by the possibility that life in some form — 
perhaps very simple microbes — may have gained a 
foothold in ancient times when Mars was wetter, if not 
warmer. It is not unthinkable that life in some form could 
persist today in underground springs warmed by heat 
vents around smoldering volcanoes, or even beneath 
the thick ice caps. To investigate those possibilities, 
NASA’s productive strategy has been to learn more 
about the history of water on Mars: How much was 
there? How long did it last? Where are formerly wet en-
vironments that make the best destinations for seeking 
evidence of past life? Where might there be wet environ-
ments capable of sustaining life today? 
The consensus strategy for answering those questions 
uses a balance of examining selected sites in great 
detail while also conducting planet-wide surveys to 
provide context for interpreting the selected sites. This 
enables researchers to extrapolate from the intensively 
investigated sites to regional and global patterns, and to 
identify which specific sites make the best candidates 
for targeted examination.
One way this balance works is in the combination 
punch of orbital and surface missions. Mineral map-
ping by NASA’s orbiting Mars Global Surveyor identified 
a hematite deposit that made Meridiani Planum the 
selected landing site for NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover 
Opportunity. The hematite suggested a possible water 
history. Opportunity’s examination of the composition 
and fine structure of rocks where it landed confirmed 
that the site had had surface and underground water, 
and added details about the acidity of the water and the 
alternation of wet and dry periods at the site. Meanwhile, 
halfway around the planet at Gusev Crater, the Spirit 
rover found evidence of materials altered in an ancient 
hydrothermal system. This “ground truthing” by the rover 
improves interpretation of current orbiters’ observations 
of the surrounding region. Conversely, orbiters’ observa-
tions add context for understanding how the environ-
ment that landing-site rocks reveal about a particular 
place and time fits into a broader history. 
Similarly, the Phoenix Mars Lander investigated a site 
with intriguing characteristics discovered from orbit. 
Spectrometers on NASA’s Mars Odyssey orbiter found 
evidence of copious water ice within the top 3 feet  
(1 meter) of the surface in high-latitude and some mid-

PAGE 55
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 55  Press Kit
latitude regions. Phoenix landed at a far-northern site 
and confirmed the presence of plentiful water ice just 
beneath the surface. In the soil above the ice, Phoenix 
found a chemical called perchlorate, which could serve 
as an energy source for microbes and as a potent anti-
freeze enabling water to be liquid at low temperature. 
As another example of the synergy among Mars space-
craft, NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, which 
reached Mars in 2006, found a less rocky, safer land-
ing site for Phoenix. The orbiter also examined more 
than 30 potential landing sites for the Mars Science 
Laboratory. Four finalist sites were examined in thor-
ough detail to identify specific mineral deposits of inter-
est and potential landing hazards down to the scale of 
individual rocks before Gale Crater was chosen as the 
landing site.
The Mars Science Laboratory is NASA’s first astrobiol-
ogy mission to Mars since the Viking landers. One goal 
of NASA’s Astrobiology Program is to determine the 
history of any environment having liquid water, other 
chemical ingredients of life, and energy sources that 
might have sustained living systems. Astrobiology’s 
investment in Mars exploration is geared toward iden-
tifying, categorizing and understanding locations on 
Mars that may have once supported habitable environ-
ments. This includes developing tools and techniques 
for identifying mineralogical and physical signs of liquid 
water, biosignatures and chemical evidence of ancient 
habitats.
Myths and Reality
Mars caught public fancy in the late 1870s, when Italian 
astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli reported using a tele-
scope to observe “canali,” or channels, on Mars. A pos-
sible mistranslation of this word as “canals” may have 
fired the imagination of Percival Lowell, an American 
businessman with an interest in astronomy. Lowell 
founded an observatory in Arizona, where his observa-
tions of Mars convinced him that the canals were dug 
by intelligent beings — a view that he energetically 
promoted for many years. 
By the turn of the last century, popular songs envi-
sioned sending messages between worlds by way of 
huge signal mirrors. On the dark side, H.G. Wells’ 1898 
novel “The War of the Worlds” portrayed an invasion of 
Earth by technologically superior Martians desperate for 
water. In the early 1900s novelist Edgar Rice Burroughs, 
known for the “Tarzan” series, also entertained young 
readers with tales of adventures among the exotic 
inhabitants of Mars, which he called Barsoom.
Fact began to turn against such imaginings when the 
first robotic spacecraft were sent to Mars in the 1960s. 
Pictures from the 1965 flyby of Mariner 4 and the 1969 
flybys of Mariner 6 and 7 showed a desolate world, 
pocked with impact craters similar to those seen on 
Earth’s moon. Mariner 9 arrived in 1971 to orbit Mars 
for the first time, but showed up just after an enormous 
dust storm had engulfed the entire planet. When the 
storm died down, Mariner 9 revealed a world that, 
while partly crater-pocked like Earth’s moon, was much 
more geologically complex, complete with gigantic 
canyons, volcanoes, dune fields and polar ice caps. 
This first wave of Mars exploration culminated in the 
Viking mission, which sent two orbiters and two land-
ers to the planet in 1975. The landers carried a suite of 
experiments that conducted chemical tests to detect 
life. Most scientists interpreted the results of these tests 
as negative, deflating hopes of identifying another world 
where life might be or have been widespread. However, 
Viking left a huge legacy of information about Mars that 
fed a hungry science community for two decades. 
The science community had many other reasons for 
being interested in Mars, apart from the direct search 
for life. The next mission on the drawing boards con-
centrated on a study of the planet’s geology and climate 
using advanced orbital reconnaissance. Over the next 
20 years, however, new findings in laboratories and in 
extreme environments on Earth came to change the 
way that scientists thought about life and Mars.
One was the 1996 announcement by a team from 
Stanford University and NASA’s Johnson Space Center 
that a meteorite believed to have originated on Mars 
contained what might be the fossils of ancient bacteria. 
This rock and other Mars meteorites discovered on sev-
eral continents on Earth appear to have been blasted 
off Mars by asteroid or comet impacts. The evidence 
that they are from Mars comes from gases trapped 
in them that unmistakably match the composition of 
Mars’ atmosphere as measured by the Viking landers. 
Many scientists have questioned the conclusions of the 
team announcing the discovery of possible life in one 
Martian meteorite, but if nothing else, the mere pres-
ence of organic compounds in the meteorites increases 
the odds of life forming at an earlier time on a wetter 
Mars. The debate has also focused attention on what 

PAGE 56
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 56  Press Kit
types of experiments would be most useful for assessing 
whether an extraterrestrial site or sample has ever held 
anything alive.
Another development shaping ideas about extrater-
restrial life was a string of spectacular findings on how 
and where life thrives on Earth. The fundamental re-
quirements for life as we know it today are liquid water, 
organic compounds and an energy source for synthesiz-
ing complex organic molecules. In recent years, it has 
become increasingly clear that life can thrive in settings 
much harsher than what we as humans can experience.
In the 1980s and 1990s, biologists found that microbial 
life has an amazing flexibility for surviving in extreme 
environments — niches that by turn are extraordinarily 
hot, or cold, or dry, or under immense pressures — that 
would be completely inhospitable to humans or com-
plex animals. Some scientists even deduce that life on 
Earth may have begun at hot vents far under the ocean’s 
surface.
This, in turn, had its effect on how scientists thought 
about Mars. Martian life might not be so widespread that 
it would be readily found at the foot of a lander space-
craft, but it may have thrived billions of years ago in an 
underground thermal spring or other hospitable environ-
ment. Or it might still exist in some form in niches below 
the currently frigid, dry, windswept surface, perhaps 
shielded in ice or in liquid water aquifers.
Each successful Mars mission uncovers more pages of 
the planet’s story. After years of studying pictures from 
the Mariner 9 and Viking orbiters, scientists gradually 
came to conclude that many features they saw sug-
gested that Mars may have been warm and wet in an 
earlier era. 
Two decades after Viking, NASA’s Mars Pathfinder 
observed rounded pebbles and sockets in larger rocks, 
suggesting conglomerates that formed in running water. 
Mars Global Surveyor’s camera detected possible evi-
dence for recent liquid water in many settings, including 
hundreds of hillside gullies. That orbiter’s longevity even 
allowed before-and-after imaging that showed fresh 
gully-flow deposits in 2005 that had not been present 
earlier in the mission. Observations by Global Surveyor 
and Odyssey have also been interpreted as evidence 
that Mars is still adjusting from a recent ice age as part of 
a repeating cycle of global climate change. The cycle re-
sults from changes in the tilt of the rotational axis of Mars 
on time scales of hundreds of thousands to a few million 
years. Mars’ tilt varies much more than Earth’s.
NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity established 
that rocks in at least one part of Mars were formed un-
der flowing surface water billions of years ago. Minerals 
present indicate the ancient water was very acidic. 
Halfway around the planet, Opportunity’s twin, Spirit, 
found a carbonate deposit offering evidence for a wet 
environment that was less acidic and found a nearly 
pure silica deposit formed by a hot spring or steam vent. 
Either of those long-ago environments deduced from 
Spirit’s observations could have been even more favor-
able for microbial life than the conditions that left the 
clues found by Opportunity during Opportunity’s first 
seven years on Mars. In 2011, the long-lived Opportunity 
also found veins of gypsum deposited by water that 
might not have been acidic. 
The European Space Agency’s Mars Express has identi-
fied exposures of clay minerals that probably formed 
in long-lasting, less-acidic wet conditions even earlier 
in Mars history than the conditions that produced the 
minerals examined by Opportunity through 2010. Mars 
Express and telescopic studies from Earth have found 
traces of atmospheric methane at Mars that might come 
from volcanic or biological sources. A radar instrument 
co-sponsored by NASA and the Italian Space Agency 
on the European orbiter has assessed the thickness and 
water content of icy layers covering Mars’ south polar 
region, yielding an estimate that the quantity of water fro-
zen into those icy layers is equivalent to a 36-foot-thick 
(11-meter-thick) coating of the whole planet.
Since 2006, NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter has 
radically expanded our knowledge of the Red Planet. 
Observing the planet at the highest spatial resolutions 
yet achieved from orbit, this mission has provided copi-
ous information about ancient environments, ice-age-
scale climate cycles and present-day changes on Mars. 
It has mapped water-related mineral deposits, including 
multiple types of clay minerals, in hundreds of locations, 
and carbonates in several locales, confirming a story of 
alteration by water in a diversity of environments early in 
Martian history and a dramatic change to very acidic wa-
ter in many areas after an era of more neutral conditions.  
With regard to recent Mars history, the Mars Recon-
naissance Orbiter has added evidence of ongoing 
climate-change cycles linked to how changes in the tilt 
of the planet’s rotation axis alter intensity of sunlight near 

PAGE 57
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 57  Press Kit
the poles. This evidence includes radar observations of 
episodic layering within the polar ice caps and of debris-
covered ice deposits. Other observations have revealed 
water ice just below the surface in middle latitudes, 
exposed in small craters formed by fresh impacts identi-
fied in before-and-after observations. These findings and 
their implications for ongoing cycles of climate change 
put water ice closer to the equator on modern Mars, in-
cluding possibly beneath the Viking 2 Lander, than most 
researchers imagined a few years ago. 
 
Orbital studies in recent years have also revealed some 
processes on Mars very unlike those on Earth related to 
temperatures low enough to freeze some of the carbon-
dioxide gas out of the planet’s thin atmosphere, which is 
mostly that gas. Carbon-dioxide ice blankets the ground 
around whichever pole is in winter. In the spring, sunlight 
penetrates the translucent ice, heating it from below. 
As the carbon dioxide thaws back into gas, it triggers 
geyser-like eruptions in some areas and fresh flows of 
sand on slopes in other areas. 
The surface pressure of the Mars atmosphere varies 
over the year as the seasonal carbon-dioxide frost forms 
and then sublimes at each pole in turn. A major finding 
by the radar on Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter is a thick, 
hidden layer of carbon-dioxide ice deep in the water 
ice that forms the bulk of the south polar ice cap. This 
deposit may contain nearly as much carbon dioxide as 
today’s Martian atmosphere. This implies that the total 
mass of the atmosphere on Mars can change several 
fold on time scales of hundreds of thousands of years 
or less. Computer modeling indicates that during larger 
tilt, when summertime solar heating at the poles is more 
intense, most of the frozen carbon dioxide rejoins the 
atmosphere, and that during smaller tilt, most of the 
atmosphere freezes out.    
Modern Mars is a more dynamic planet today than we 
realized before the advent of frequent, high-resolution 
imaging. Hundreds of sets of before-and-after images 
from Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Reconnaissance 
Orbiter document soil flowing down gullies, rocks 
bouncing down hills, dunes migrating, craters forming, 
icy layers receding and dust blowing. Cameras in orbit 
have even caught avalanches and tall whirlwinds as they 
happen. Image sequences from Spirit show the motions 
of dust devils dancing across the landscape and clouds 
scooting across the sky. Thus, the Martian landscape, 
which has changed dramatically in the past, continues 
to change today.
Three Ages of Mars
Based on what they have learned from spacecraft mis-
sions, scientists view Mars as the “in-between” planet 
of the inner solar system. Small rocky planetary bodies 
such as Mercury and Earth’s moon apparently did not 
have enough internal heat to drive the motion of tectonic 
plates, so their crusts grew cold and static relatively 
soon after they formed when the solar system con-
densed into planets about 4.6 billion years ago. Devoid 
of atmospheres, they are riddled with craters that are rel-
ics of impacts from a period of bombardment when the 
inner planets were sweeping up remnants of small rocky 
bodies that failed to “make it as planets” in the solar 
system’s early times.
Earth and Venus, by contrast, are larger planets with 
substantial internal heat sources and significant at-
mospheres. Earth’s surface is continually reshaped by 
tectonic plates sliding under and against each other and 
by materials spouting forth from active volcanoes where 
plates are ripped apart. Both Earth and Venus have 
been paved over so recently that both lack any discern-
ible record of cratering from the era of bombardment in 
the early solar system.
On the basis of current yet evolving knowledge, Mars 
appears to stand between those sets of worlds. Like 
Earth and Venus, it possesses many volcanoes, al-
though they probably did not remain active as long as 
counterparts on Earth and Venus. On Earth, a single 
“hot spot” or plume might form a chain of middling-size 
islands, such as the Hawaiian Islands, as a tectonic 
plate slowly slides over it. On Mars, there are appar-
ently no such tectonic plates, at least as far as we know 
today, so when volcanoes formed in place they had the 
time to become much more enormous than the rapidly 
moving volcanoes on Earth. Overall, Mars appears to be 
neither as dead as Mercury and our moon, nor as active 
as Earth and Venus. As one scientist quips, “Mars is a 
warm corpse, if not a fire-breathing dragon.” Thanks to 
the ongoing observations by current missions, however, 
this view of Mars is still evolving.
Mars almost resembles two different worlds that have 
been glued together. From latitudes around the equa-
tor to the south are ancient highlands pockmarked with 
craters from the solar system’s early era, yet riddled with 
channels that attest to the flow of water. The northern 
third of the planet, however, overall is sunken and much 
smoother at mile (kilometer) scales. Analysis of subsur-

PAGE 58
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 58  Press Kit
face densities by their gravitational effect on orbiters 
supports a theory that an impactor almost big enough 
to be a planet itself bashed Mars early in Martian history, 
excavating the largest crater in the solar system. If that 
happened, it was long-enough ago that it would not ex-
plain the smoothness of the northern plains. Theories for 
that range from proposing that the plains are the floor 
of an ancient sea to proposing that the smoothness is 
merely the end product of innumerable lava flows.
Scientists today view Mars as having had three broad 
ages, each named for a geographic area that typifies it:
• The Noachian Era is the name given to the time 
spanning roughly the first billion years of Mars’ existence 
after the planet was formed 4.6 billion years ago. In this 
era, scientists suspect that Mars was quite active with 
periods of warm and wet environments, erupting volca-
noes and some degree of tectonic activity. The planet 
may have had a thicker atmosphere to support flowing 
water, and it may have rained and snowed.
• In the Hesperian Era, which lasted for about the 
next 500 million to 1.5 billion years, geologic activity was 
slowing down and near-surface water perhaps was 
freezing to form surface and buried ice masses. Despite 
plunging temperatures, water pooled underground 
erupted when heated by impacts in catastrophic 
floods that surged across vast stretches of the surface 
— floods so powerful that they unleashed the force 
of thousands of Mississippi Rivers. Eventually, water 
became locked up as permafrost or subsurface ice, or 
was partially lost into outer space.
• The Amazonian Era is the current age that began 
around 2 billion to 3 billion years ago. The planet is now 
a dry, desiccating environment with only a modest atmo-
sphere in relation to Earth. In fact, the atmosphere is so 
thin that pure water exposed to it can be stable only as 
a solid or a gas, not as a liquid. The climate and perhaps 
the stability of water at the surface may vary on scales of 
thousands to millions of years as the tilt of the planet and 
its distance from the sun waver cyclically.
Apart from that broad outline, there is lively debate and 
disagreement on the details of Mars’ history. How wet 
was the planet, and how long ago? What eventually 
happened to all of the water? That is all a story that is 
still being written.
Even if we ultimately learn that Mars never harbored life 
as we know it here on Earth, scientific exploration of the 
Red Planet can assist in understanding the history and 
evolution of life on our own world. Much if not all of the 
evidence for the origin of life here on Earth has been 
obliterated by the rapid pace of weathering and global 
tectonics that have operated over billions of years. Mars, 
by comparison, is a composite world with some regions 
that may have histories similar to Earth’s ancient crust, 
while others are a frozen gallery of the solar system’s 
early days. 
Thus, even if life never developed on Mars — something 
that we cannot answer just yet — scientific exploration 
of the planet may yield critical information unobtain-
able by any other means about the pre-biotic chemistry 
that led to life on Earth. Mars as a fossil graveyard of 
the chemical conditions that fostered life on Earth is an 
intriguing possibility.
 

PAGE 59
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 59  Press Kit
Mission: Country, Launch Date, Purpose, Results
Marsnik 1: USSR, 10/10/60, Mars flyby, did not reach 
Earth orbit
Marsnik 2: USSR, 10/14/60, Mars flyby, did not reach 
Earth orbit
Sputnik 22: USSR, 10/24/62, Mars flyby, achieved 
Earth orbit only
Mars 1: USSR, 11/1/62, Mars flyby, radio failed at 65.9 
million miles (106 million kilometers)
Sputnik 24: USSR, 11/4/62, Mars flyby, achieved Earth 
orbit only
Mariner 3: U.S., 11/5/64, Mars flyby, shroud failed to 
jettison
Mariner 4: U.S., 11/28/64, first successful Mars flyby 
7/14/65, returned 21 photos
Zond 2: USSR, 11/30/64, Mars flyby, passed Mars but 
radio failed, returned no planetary data
Mariner 6: U.S., 2/24/69, Mars flyby 7/31/69, returned 
75 photos
Mariner 7: U.S., 3/27/69, Mars flyby 8/5/69, returned 
126 photos
Mars 1969A: USSR, 3/27/69, Mars orbiter, did not 
reach Earth orbit
Mars 1969B: USSR, 4/2/69, Mars orbiter, failed during 
launch
Mariner 8: U.S., 5/8/71, Mars orbiter, failed during 
launch
Kosmos 419: USSR, 5/10/71, Mars lander, achieved 
Earth orbit only
Mars 2: USSR, 5/19/71, Mars orbiter/lander arrived 
11/27/71, no useful data, lander burned up due to steep 
entry
Historical Mars Missions 
Mars 3: USSR, 5/28/71, Mars orbiter/lander, arrived 
12/3/71, lander operated on surface for 20 seconds 
before failing
Mariner 9: U.S., 5/30/71, Mars orbiter, operated in orbit 
11/13/71 to 10/27/72, returned 7,329 photos
Mars 4: USSR, 7/21/73, failed Mars orbiter, flew past 
Mars 2/10/74
Mars 5: USSR, 7/25/73, Mars orbiter, arrived 2/12/74, 
lasted a few days
Mars 6: USSR, 8/5/73, Mars flyby module and lander, 
arrived 3/12/74, lander failed due to fast impact
Mars 7: USSR, 8/9/73, Mars flyby module and lander, 
arrived 3/9/74, lander missed the planet
Viking 1: U.S., 8/20/75, Mars orbiter/lander, orbit 
6/19/76–1980, lander 7/20/76–1982
Viking 2: U.S., 9/9/75, Mars orbiter/lander, orbit 
8/7/76–1987, lander 9/3/76–1980; combined, the 
Viking orbiters and landers returned more than 50,000 
photos
Phobos 1: USSR, 7/7/88, Mars orbiter and Phobos 
lander, lost 8/88 en route to Mars
Phobos 2: USSR, 7/12/88, Mars orbiter and Phobos 
lander, lost 3/89 near Phobos
Mars Observer: U.S., 9/25/92, Mars orbiter, lost just 
before Mars arrival 8/21/93
Mars Global Surveyor: U.S., 11/7/96, Mars orbiter, 
arrived 9/12/97, high-detail mapping through 1/00, third 
extended mission completed 9/06, last communication 
11/2/06 
Mars 96: Russia, 1/16/96, orbiter/two landers/two pen-
etrators, launch vehicle failed
Mars Pathfinder: U.S., 12/4/96, Mars lander/rover, 
landed 7/4/97, completed prime mission and began 
extended mission 8/3/97, last transmission 9/27/97

PAGE 60
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 60  Press Kit
Nozomi: Japan, 7/4/98, Mars orbiter, failed to enter 
orbit 12/03 
Mars Climate Orbiter: U.S., 12/11/98, lost on arrival 
9/23/99
Mars Polar Lander/Deep Space 2: U.S., 1/3/99, 
lander/two penetrators, lost on arrival 12/3/99
Mars Odyssey: U.S., 3/7/01, Mars orbiter, arrived 
10/24/01, completed prime mission 8/25/04, currently 
conducting extended mission of science and communi-
cation relay
Mars Express/Beagle 2: European Space Agency, 
6/2/03, Mars orbiter/lander, orbiter completed prime 
mission 11/05, currently in extended mission; lander 
lost on arrival 12/25/03
Mars Exploration Rover Spirit: U.S., 6/10/03, Mars 
rover, landed 1/4/04 for three-month prime mission 
inside Gusev Crater, completed several extended mis-
sions, last communication 3/22/10
Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity: U.S., 7/7/03, 
Mars rover, landed 1/25/04 for three-month prime mis-
sion in Meridiani Planum region, currently conducting 
extended mission
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter: U.S., 8/12/05, Mars 
orbiter, arrived 3/12/06, completed prime mission 
9/26/10, currently conducting extended mission of sci-
ence and communication relay
Phoenix Mars Lander: U.S., 8/4/07, Mars lander, 
landed 5/25/08, completed prime mission and began 
extended mission 8/26/08, last communication 11/2/08
Phobos-Grunt: Russia, 11/8/11, Phobos lander and 
sample return, achieved Earth orbit only 

PAGE 61
Mars Science Laboratory Landing 61  Press Kit
The Mars Science Laboratory Project is managed by 
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif., for 
NASA’s Science Mission Directorate, Washington. JPL 
is a division of the California Institute of Technology in 
Pasadena.
At NASA Headquarters, Washington, the Mars 
Exploration Program is managed by the Science 
Mission Directorate. John Grunsfeld is associate 
administrator for the Science Mission Directorate and 
Charles Gay is deputy associate administrator. Douglas 
McCuistion is director of the Mars Exploration Program. 
Program and Project Management 
Michael Meyer is lead scientist for the Mars Exploration 
Program and program scientist for the Mars Science 
Laboratory. Mary Voytek is deputy program scientist for 
the Mars Science Laboratory. David Lavery is program 
executive for the Mars Science Laboratory.
At JPL, Fuk Li is Mars Program manager and Roger 
Gibbs is deputy manager. Richard Zurek and David 
Beaty are Mars chief scientists. Peter Theisinger is Mars 
Science Laboratory project manager and Richard Cook 
is deputy project manager. John Grotzinger, of Caltech, is 
Mars Science Laboratory project scientist, and Joy Crisp 
and Ashwin Vasavada are deputy project scientists.