
PAGE 1
Assessing Mars Curiosity Rover Wheel Damage
Arturo Rankin, Nikunj Patel, Evan Graser, Jiun-Kai Freddy Wang, Kimberly Rink
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology
4800 Oak Grove Dr.
Pasadena, CA 91109
(818) 354-9269
arankin@jpl.nasa.gov
Abstract—An alarming rate of wheel skin cracks was ﬁrst ob-
served on the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Curiosity rover
about 14 months after the start of its surface mission. Nine years
later (as of August 2, 2021), Curiosity has four broken wheel
grousers, three on the left middle wheel and one on the right
middle wheel. There are a substantial number of wheel skin
cracks on the left front, left middle, and right middle wheels
such that the number of grousers on each that are considered
at risk of breaking are 10, 7, and 11, respectively. Although the
current level of wheel damage does not signiﬁcantly limit Cu-
riosity’s mission objectives, a higher damage rate could impact
surface operations, so the damage rate is closely monitored. On
November 30, 2013, the MSL Surface Operations team began
periodically acquiring images of Curiosity’s wheels. In this
paper, we describe the process the Mobility Operations team
uses to assess wheel damage, the current state of Curiosity’s
wheels, and how the wheel damage assessments have inﬂuenced
driving guidelines and wheel imaging frequency.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. I NTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1
2. W HEEL IMAGING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3
3. P ROCESS FOR ASSESSING WHEEL DAMAGE . . . . . . .5
4. C URRENT STATE OF CURIOSITY ’S WHEELS . . . . . . .8
5. H OW WHEEL DAMAGE ASSESSMENT HAS INFLU -
ENCED DRIVING GUIDELINES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
6. S UMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
BIOGRAPHY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19
1. I NTRODUCTION
The Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Curiosity rover landed
on Mars on August 6, 2012 and driving commenced seven-
teen Martian solar days (sols) later. As of sol 3195, Curiosity
has driven 26,256 m over a variety of terrain types and
slopes [1]. The previous Mars rovers, Mars Pathﬁnder (MPF)
Sojourner [2] and Mars Exploration Rovers (MER) Spirit and
Opportunity [3], did not experience any wheel damage during
their lifetimes. In October 2013, the Curiosity Operations
team observed signiﬁcant wheel damage after less than 4 km
of driving. Lessons learned from the resulting investigation
into the causes of the damage informed the redesign of the
wheels for the Mars 2020 (M2020) Perseverance rover, which
landed on Mars on February 18, 2021, and no wheel damage
has been observed in its ﬁrst eight months of driving.
Figure 1 illustrates the size differences between a MPF, MER,
and MSL rover and their wheels, and Table 1 compares key
wheel speciﬁcations for MPF, MER, MSL, and M2020. The
978-1-6654-3760-8/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE
Figure 1. MPF (left), MER (middle), and MSL (right)
ﬂight-like testbed rovers in the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
(JPL) Mars Yard, illustrating the size differences between the
rovers and their wheels. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech.
Table 1. Comparison of Mars rover mass and wheel
speciﬁcations.
MPF MER MSL M2020
Rover
mass
11.5 kg 185 kg 899 kg 1,025 kg
Wheel
diameter
including
grouser
14 cm 26.2 cm 50.0 cm 52.3 cm
Wheel
width
7.9 cm 21.5 cm 40.0 cm 33.6 cm
Wheel
surface
thickness
0.2 mm
stainless
steel
3.25
mm alu-
minum
0.75
mm alu-
minum
1.651
mm alu-
minum
Wheel
grousers
34 rows
of spot-
welded
stainless
steel
cleats
25
straight
grousers
19
chevroned
grousers
plus 8
straight
grousers
48
gently
curved
grousers
size of the MSL and M2020 rovers are nearly identical with
the M2020 rover being 126 kg heavier. The surface of each
of Curiosity’s six identical wheels consists of 19 cleat-like
features (called grousers) across the entire width of the wheel
for traction, a set of odometry features that leave a distinctive
pattern for performing visual odometry (VO) on otherwise
featureless terrain, and a thin layer of skin (0.75 mm). Each
grouser contains four chevron features designed to mitigate
wheel side slippage. Other features that provide structural
strength are a vertical rim on each edge of the wheel and a
stiffening ring around the interior of the wheel, located two-
thirds of the wheel width from the inside edge of the wheel.
A drive actuator is attached to each wheel’s stiffening ring by
1

PAGE 2
Figure 2. An unrolled MSL wheel. Each wheel contains 19 grousers and an odometry feature that spells ”JPL” in Morse code.
Figure 3. Primary features of the MSL wheel. Image
Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
six titanium ﬂexures (spokes) that also function as suspension
springs [4]. Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the sections and
features of the MSL wheel.
The MPF wheel body, MER wheel, and MSL wheel are
constructed of aluminum for its high strength-to-weight ratio.
Several factors put MSL wheels at a higher risk of damage
than MPF and MER.
1. Curiosity has a signiﬁcantly larger mass than MPF
(78.17x) and MER (4.86x), which translates into larger
load bearing forces on its wheels.
2. Curiosity’s wheels are nearly four times as tall as MPF
wheels and twice as tall as MER wheels, enabling them
to climb over taller rocks, which translates into longer
contact times with rocks and larger wheel drops off of
rocks.
3. Curiosity’s wheels have fewer grousers than MER
wheels, which translates into a larger distance between
grousers and more opportunities for rock features to
contact and damage wheel skin.
4. Curiosity’s wheels have thinner skin than MER wheels
(0.75 mm vs. 3.52 mm), making them more susceptible
to skin punctures.
The decision to use 0.75 mm wheel skin for MSL’s wheels,
the absolute minimum thickness that was machinable, was
a consequence of the need to minimize both the total mass
of the rover and also the loads experienced by the suspen-
sion system when it is deployed during the Entry-Descent-
Landing (EDL) phase of the mission. While the MSL wheels
were designed to operate with considerable damage, the rate
at which damage was occurring was unexpected and raised
concerns regarding wheel life expectancy and the ability to
meet the mission goal of performing science over at least 20
km of odometry.
In December 2013, a multi-institution Tiger team of 13
individuals with expertise in geology, mechanical system
engineering, failure analysis, rover operations, mobility per-
formance, stress analysis, ADAMS analysis, and materials
was formed to determine the cause of the excessive wheel
wear and to recommend a strategy to reduce the wheel
damage rate. Extensive characterization of the mechanism
of wheel damage per terrain type is described in [5] and [6]
and summarized in [7]. In general, the high wheel damage
rate was attributed to a combination of driving over pointed,
embedded rocks not seen at previous Mars rover landing
sites, and the use of a motor control algorithm that drove
each wheel at the same speed, irrespective of wheel/terrain
interaction. To reduce the rate of wheel damage, a terrain-
adaptive wheel speed control software patch called TRCTL
was developed and installed on Curiosity [8].
The size of cracks in wheel skin can grow over time, increas-
ing the loading on nearby grousers. Wheel life-cycle testing
in the JPL Mars Yard showed that a grouser is at risk of
breaking once at least 70% of the skin between the wheel’s
inner edge and the stiffener ring is cracked on both sides of
the grouser. Periodic imaging of the wheels and a method for
quantifying and tracking the damage level of each wheel was
implemented.
Wheel damage inspection images are acquired by the Mars
Hand Lens Imager (MAHLI), an instrument mounted on
the turret on the end of the robotic arm. Supplemental
wheel damage inspection images of the right wheels are also
acquired by the Mast Camera (Mastcam), which is mounted
on the Remote Sensing Mast (RSM). Single position MAHLI
wheel imaging (SPMWI) sequencing was developed to ac-
quire an image of each wheel in a single wheel position. Full
MAHLI wheel imaging (FMWI) sequencing was developed
to acquire an image of each wheel in ﬁve equal-distance
wheel positions.
2

PAGE 3
Figure 4. Mosaic of the six MAHLI wheel images acquired on sol 177. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
Figure 5. A frame from the sol 2030 underbelly FMWI
animation generated during uplink planning.
Wheel damage assessment is primarily performed with
FMWI after driving a speciﬁed number of meters. The ﬁrst
FMWI was completed on sol 490. Since then, the FMWI
frequency has been adjusted several times and is currently
executed every kilometer. After each FMWI, wheel damage
is assessed by measuring each individual crack in wheel
images and tabulating the cumulative crack length within
each skin section and the cumulative crack length for each
wheel, denoted left front (LF), left middle (LM), left rear
(LR), right front (RF), right middle (RM), and right rear (RR).
SPMWI provides a snapshot of a portion of each wheel at
a less uniform cadence and is used to identify signiﬁcant
changes in damage level, but not to measure crack lengths.
As of sol 3150, Curiosity has three broken grousers on
the LM wheel and one broken grouser on the RM wheel.
Changes in the damage growth rate have inﬂuenced the wheel
imaging frequency, the method of damage tracking, and
driving guidelines throughout Curiosity’s mission. In this
paper we describe wheel imaging, the process for assessing
wheel damage and how it has evolved over time, the current
state of Curiosity’s wheels, and how the damage assessment
has inﬂuenced driving methods and restrictions.
Figure 6. Cropped sol 34 MAHLI image of the LM wheel
showing the ﬁrst observed damage to Curiosity wheels.
Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
2. W HEEL IMAGING
Prior to launch, cracks had been observed in MSL wheels on a
testbed rover. Therefore, early in the mission, the Operations
team periodically performed SPMWI to monitor the health of
the wheels. The ﬁrst and second SPMWI were performed on
sol 34 and 177, after 108.9 m and 723.4 m cumulative odom-
etry, respectively. A sequence was executed that moved the
robotic arm into a conﬁguration that positioned the MAHLI
to point under the belly of the rover to acquire images of each
wheel. Figure 4 shows a mosaic of the six sol 177 MAHLI
wheel images and Figure 5 illustrates the arm conﬁguration
for underbelly wheel imaging.
The ﬁrst Curiosity wheel damage was discovered during an
inspection of the sol 34 MAHLI image of the LM wheel. As
shown in Figure 6, light could be seen shining through a crack
in the LM wheel skin, as observed from the underside of the
wheel. The Tiger team concluded that this crack is likely from
wheel/terrain interaction during Curiosity’s touchdown on the
surface of Mars.
3

PAGE 4
Figure 7. A frame from the sol 2115 overhead FMWI
animation generated during uplink planning.
In the sol 275 SPMWI (after 727.2 m), a few pin hole punc-
tures were observed in several wheels. More concerning, in
the sol 463 SPMWI (after 4,420.2 m cumulative odometry),
medium-sized holes were observed in the LF and LM wheels.
The SPMWI frequency guideline was then increased to every
50 m. Six sols later (on sol 469), another SPMWI was
performed and several cracks were observed in the RM, LM,
and LF wheels. After three more SPMWI (on sols 472, 476,
and 486), Curiosity started its ﬁrst FMWI on sol 488 and
completed it on sol 490.
FMWI enables wheel damage characterization over the full
surface of the six wheels. MAHLI and Mastcam take images
of each wheel, then the rover drives forward to rotate the
wheels. The cameras image the newly exposed sections, and
the process is repeated until all wheels rotate one revolution
for full coverage. The arm must be stowed during driving
to protect it from impacting terrain and experiencing terrain
induced shock while extended. Therefore, the arm is stowed
prior to executing each FMWI drive step and unstowed after
for imaging. During FMWI drive steps, visual odometry is
enabled to document wheel slippage. TRCTL is not used for
FMWI driving so that each wheel rotates the same amount
during each drive step, regardless of the terrain shape.
For the ﬁrst two FMWI (sols 488+490 and 512+513+515),
the drive distance between acquiring sets of wheel images
was 0.262 m, which corresponds to a wheel rotation of 60 ◦.
Wheel imaging was performed before the ﬁrst drive step and
after each of ﬁve drive steps over a total drive distance of
1.31 m. Starting with the sol 521 FMWI, the drive distance
between acquiring sets of wheel images has been 0.314 m,
which corresponds to a wheel rotation of 72◦. Wheel imaging
is performed before the ﬁrst drive step and after each of four
drive steps over a total drive distance of 1.256 m.
Starting on sol 587, the number of MAHLI images acquired at
every wheel position was reduced from six to four, decreasing
the overall number of MAHLI wheel images needing to be
downlinked each FMWI from 30 to 20. Two MAHLI images
of the middle wheels were identiﬁed as redundant given the
images of the rear wheels also have the middle wheels in
the frame. The redundant images were removed from the
imaging sequence.
By sol 2113, Curiosity had driven 600.5 m since the previous
FMWI and was 100 m overdue for a FMWI. However, there
was a dust storm in the vicinity of Curiosity and there was
concern about dust collecting on the MAHLI lens during a
FMWI. On sol 2114, a set of MAHLI wheel images were
captured with the MAHLI lens cover closed, but analysis
by the mobility team deemed the quality of the images
insufﬁcient for performing wheel damage assessment.
On sol 2115, a change was made to acquire overhead MAHLI
wheel images instead of underbelly MAHLI wheel images.
The MAHLI pointing during overhead wheel imaging is
closer to nadir than during underbelly wheel imaging, de-
creasing the risk of dust accumulating on the lens while the
lens cover is open. Figure 7 illustrates the arm conﬁguration
for acquiring overhead MAHLI wheel images.
Because the base of the arm is on the left side of the rover,
only the left wheels and RF wheel can be imaged with the
MAHLI from an overhead arm conﬁguration. Similarly, be-
cause the RSM is mounted on the right side of the rover, only
the right wheels can be imaged by the Mastcam. Since sol
2115, wheel damage assessment has been performed using
overhead MAHLI wheel images to assess the left wheels and
the RF wheel, and Mastcam wheel images to assess the RM
and RR wheels.
The RM wheel is the closest wheel to the RSM and cannot be
fully imaged by the Mastcam using a single pointing angle.
Therefore, at each wheel position, two Mastcam images
are acquired of the RM wheel using slightly different RSM
pointing angles. Figure 8 illustrates the three Mastcam wheel
images and Figure 9 illustrates the four overhead MAHLI
wheel images. In the images of the rear wheels, a portion
of the wheels are occluded by the bogie suspension arms.
This is acceptable for wheel damage assessment since the rear
wheels currently have insigniﬁcant damage.
MAHLI and Mastcam wheel images are captured at a reso-
lution of 1632x1200 and 1408x1200 pixels, respectively. On
FMWI sols, Rover Planners (RPs) build a drive sequence that
includes FMWI commands. Additional driving is sometimes
included in the drive sequence after the FMWI activities.
On sol 3195, the duration of the FMWI portion of the drive
sequence was 117.7 minutes.
The plot in Figure 10 illustrates the period of increased
SPMWI frequency and start of FMWI after a medium size
hole was observed in the LF and LM wheels on sol 463. A
FMWI event is often completed in a single sol, but it also has
been common to complete it over two or more sols. On sol
1269, two SPMWI events were performed in part to image
the terrain under the RR wheel following a RR drive actuator
stall on sol 1267. Since sol 2407, all of the FMWI events
have been performed on a single sol.
Figure 11 illustrates that post SPMWI or FMWI driving can
be planned. Post SPMWI and FMWI driving was common
around sol 500-750. During that period, there were three
drives after MAHLI wheel imaging that exceeded 100 m.
Figure 12 illustrates what the cumulative odometry was prior
to each MAHLI wheel imaging event.
4

PAGE 5
Figure 8. The three sol 3195 Mastcam wheel images. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
Figure 9. The four sol 3195 MAHLI wheel images. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
3. P ROCESS FOR ASSESSING WHEEL
DAMAGE
Curiosity wheel damage assessment is performed by the MSL
Wheel Wear team, which is a subset of the MSL Mobility
Operations team. The wheel damage assessment process has
several evaluations of increasing detail at each stage.
1. Tactical assessment (15 minutes)
2. Initial look assessment (1 day)
3. Crack length measurement (1-2 weeks)
Tactical operations involves assessing rover health and safety
from the most recent downlinked data, and generating and
reviewing next-sol sequences prior to a pre-scheduled uplink
window. The tactical and initial look assessments are quali-
tative evaluations focused on identifying major changes that
may impact tactical operations. For example, discovery of a
signiﬁcant change in wheel state may lead to changes in sol
plans or constraints. Tactical and initial look assessments are
followed by measurements of the cracks (damage features)
to quantify wheel damage. The measurements are compiled
with historical data for long term trending.
5

PAGE 6
Figure 10. MAHLI wheel imaging events per sol.
Figure 11. Total odometry achieved on each sol MAHLI
wheel imaging was performed.
When a new set of FMWI images is received, a mobility
downlink analyst checks for any major changes in wheel
damage during the next tactical shift. Images are compared
to the previous set for new grouser breaks, new damage
features, large growth in existing features, and other off-
nominal changes such as rocks stuck within wheel holes. This
tactical assessment usually takes less than 15 minutes and
is focused on identifying changes in wheel state that may
restrict activities that can be planned for the next sol. The
six wheels are then divided across the Wheel Wear team for
more detailed assessments. Each member is assigned one or
two wheels on a rotating basis to reduce assessor bias.
For the initial look assessment, each wheel is evaluated in
detail for qualitative changes. Current images are compared
with those from the previous FMWI set to identify grouser
breaks, new features, and existing features that grew or
merged. The Wheel Wear team discusses initial look ﬁndings
to establish consensus on the states of the wheels, and to
determine if additional analysis is required. The initial look
assessment is generally performed in less than one day.
An example is the identiﬁcation of a large skin ﬂap protruding
into the LM wheel, ﬁrst seen in MAHLI images on sol 1127.
Figure 12. Cumulative odometry prior to each MAHLI
wheel imaging event.
It required analysis to determine the risk to the LM wheel
actuator’s cable bundle. The Wheel Wear team agreed that
it was not long enough to be an immediate hazard, and since
the base of it was a grouser, it could not grow any longer. The
risks from skin ﬂaps are discussed in Section 4 and the large
skin ﬂap on the LM wheel is illustrated in Figure 27.
After completing the qualitative assessments, the cracks on
the wheels are measured. Each wheel has a crack map that
shows the locations and shapes of the features on it. The
LM wheel crack map is illustrated in Figure 13. Cracks are
numbered in order of their discovery (larger numbers are the
most recent). The size of each crack is expressed in terms
of a dimensionless ratio by dividing the length of a crack
along the width of the skin section, by the width of the skin
section. This is done by taking a pixel measurement of the
skin section that a crack is on, and a pixel measurement of
the crack length parallel to the previous measurement. As
illustrated in Figure 14, an image manipulation tool such as
GNU Image Manipulation Program (GIMP) is used to take
pixel measurements.
The measurements are compiled in a spreadsheet to track
long-term trends. The spreadsheet has logic to accommodate
cracks that could not be measured due to lighting conditions,
and for cracks that merge together. It provides the data for
other trending tools such as a crack length analysis dashboard
(Figure 22) that summarizes the conditions of the wheels, and
the life model for comparison with Mars Yard three-wheel
test track data (Figure 29).
Due to the changes in conditions between FMWI sets, the
measurement process is manually intensive. Sunlight may
highlight particular features on a given sol more than pre-
viously seen and completely obscure others. The wheel
positions are not consistent between FMWI sets so asses-
sors must visually orient themselves based on the wheel
grousers and damage features, especially where only the non-
odometry grousers are visible. This process of correlating 2D
representations of 3D features to 2D imagery in inconsistent
conditions results in measurement variance.
Figure 15 and Table 2 show the variability between measure-
ments of each crack, grouped by wheel. The front and middle
wheels have tight distributions with average differences an
6

PAGE 7
Figure 13. Sol 3195 LM wheel crack map. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
Figure 14. Sol 3195 pixel measurement of the LM wheel using GIMP. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
order of magnitude smaller than the average crack measure-
ment. The larger spread for the two rear wheels is due to
the low sample size from not having accumulated as much
damage. Numbers in the ”Overall” row in Table 2 are the
average length and average differences of all cracks on all
wheels. The data shows that variances between a crack’s
measurements are minor relative to the width of the wheel,
with the overall average difference between measurements of
all wheels being just 1.498 mm compared to the wheel width
of 400 mm. The rear wheels have fewer and smaller damage
features than the middle and front wheels. This combined
with a reduced resolution from being further away in wheel
images results in fewer measurements made throughout the
mission and contributes to the larger measurement error seen
on the LR and RR wheels.
7

PAGE 8
Figure 15. Variability between measurements of cracks, by
wheel.
Table 2. Summary of Crack Measurements
Wheel Average
Crack
Length
Measure-
ment [mm]
Average
Difference
Between
Measure-
ments [mm]
Number of
Measure-
ment
Samples
LF 35.546 2.348 1208
LM 43.639 1.611 1144
LR 22.203 9.931 4
RF 16.582 0.740 472
RM 36.518 1.083 1559
RR 22.524 -5.048 19
Overall 35.011 1.498 4406
4. C URRENT STATE OF CURIOSITY ’S
WHEELS
The current state of Curiosity’s wheels is best understood
when put in context with the progression of wheel wear over
the course of the mission. Key wheel wear events are listed
in Table 3.
On sol 490, the ﬁrst FMWI was completed after the ﬁrst
sizeable holes on the rover wheels were observed. Following
this event, a Tiger team was formed that conducted extensive
testing and algorithm development to reduce the wheel dam-
age rate. A signiﬁcant event in the life of each wheel is when
grouser breaks are ﬁrst discovered. By sol 3195, the Wheel
Wear team had discovered three grouser breaks on the LM
wheel and one grouser break on the RM wheel. The ﬁrst two
grouser breaks on the LM wheel were discovered in sol 1641
wheel images and the 3rd grouser break on the LM wheel was
discovered in sol 3079 wheel images.
TRCTL was approved for nominal use in ﬂight on sol 1678,
following the discovery of the ﬁrst two LM grouser breaks in
sol 1641 wheel images. Since then, the wheel grouser break
rate has been signiﬁcantly slower than predicted by the Tiger
team. However, while there have been decreases in damage
rates, it is challenging to distinguish if they are due to TRCTL
or driving over easier terrain. The ﬁrst and only grouser break
Table 3. Key wheel wear events
Sol Event
34 The ﬁrst SPMWI. First wheel damage observed (a
crack on the LM wheel)
490 The ﬁrst FMWI was performed after sizeable holes
were observed on sol 463
516 Restriction against use of Autonomous navigation
(AutoNav) and multi-sol drives started
1641 Two grouser breaks discovered on the LM wheel
(grousers 10 and 12)
1678 TRCTL was approved for nominal use in ﬂight
1781 AutoNav is once again permitted in all terrain types
when conditions warrant it
2407 First grouser break discovered on the RM wheel
(grouser 12)
3079 Third grouser break discovered on the LM wheel
(grouser 11)
3195 Latest FMWI (downlinked August 2, 2021)
Figure 16. A break occurred on grousers 10 and 12 of the
LM wheel sometime between sol 1591 and 1641.
on the RM wheel was discovered in sol 2407 Mastcam wheel
images.
On sol 2115, the Operations team implemented overhead
capturing of MAHLI wheel images, which resulted in more
detailed documentation of the wheel state. The current status
of Curiosity’s wheels is based on the latest FMWI performed
on sol 3195, from which the Wheel Wear team concluded
that maintaining a cadence of conducting FMWI every 1 km
is sufﬁcient for monitoring wheel damage.
According to Tiger team guidelines, three grouser breaks on
a single wheel is considered a milestone that requires reeval-
uation of the current driving and wheel imaging guidelines.
After the sol 3079 FMWI, when the 3rd grouser break on the
LM wheel was documented, the Wheel Wear team concluded
that based on the rate of damage observed over the past few
FMWI, the 3rd grouser break should not be alarming and the
current guidelines for driving are effective for reducing wheel
damage. Figures 16, 17 and 18 illustrate the progression of
grouser breaks on the LM wheel.
Figure 16 shows the state of LM wheel grousers 10, 11,
and 12 on sol 1591, before any grouser breaks had been
discovered, and on sol 1641, when the grouser 10 and 12
breaks were discovered. In the sol 1641 image, there is
obvious separation where the grouser 12 break occurred,
but the grouser 10 break is subtle, not detected by a clear
8

PAGE 9
Figure 17. Status of the grouser 10 and 12 breaks on the
LM wheel on sol 2407.
Figure 18. A view of the grouser 10, 11, and 12 breaks on
the LM wheel on sol 3079. The grouser 11 break is
observable from a top-down and side view.
separation but by a slight misalignment in the top-down view
of the grouser.
Figure 17 shows the state of LM wheel grouser breaks 10
and 12 on sol 2407. At the grouser 12 break, there is much
less lateral separation than previously seen on sol 1641 and
a visible lateral bend in grouser 12. At the grouser 10 break,
there is no visible separation or misalignment, but the crack
from the base to the top of the grouser is visible from a side
view of the grouser.
Figure 18 shows the 3rd grouser break (on grouser number
11) on the LM wheel, discovered on sol 3079. The break is
slightly visible in a top-down view and conﬁrmed in a side
Figure 19. A view of the grouser 12 break on the RM wheel
on sol 2407. The grouser break is not observable from a
top-down view, but can be clearly seen from views of both
sides of grouser 12.
view. The biggest damage feature on the LM wheel is named
Moria (named after the Dwarven city from J.R.R. Tolkien’s
works, and voted for by the MSL team). As illustrated in
Figure 19, the only grouser break on the RM wheel (on
grouser number 12) is not visible from a top-down view of the
grouser, but is visible from views of each side of the grouser.
Figures 20 and 21 show wheel status per skin section and
cumulative damage per wheel section, respectively, for the
front and middle wheels on sols 490, 1682, and 2115. There
was a signiﬁcant increase in wheel damage from sol 490 to
1682 and a relatively small increase from sol 1682 to 2115.
The red lines in Figure 20 are the broken grousers and blue
lines are the at-risk grouser due to high damage in the skin
section around them. The yellow skin sections in Figure 20
are ones with some damage and orange skin sections are ones
with signiﬁcant damage. The green sections in Figure 20 are
the wheel sections with minimal damage.
The percentage of wheel damage per skin section can be seen
in Figure 21. The damage on the RR and LR wheels is not
depicted in the ﬁgures; this is due to the minimal damage
these wheels have experienced. The relatively low damage
on the LR and RR wheels is illustrated in Figure 22.
After 26,255 m of driving on Mars (as of sol 3195), damage to
Curiosity’s wheels is less severe than predicted by the Tiger
team (see Section 5). The number of grouser breaks is less
than what the Tiger team expected by this amount of total
odometry, and the Wheel Wear team has observed a relatively
slow increase in wheel damage. Table 4 shows the number of
features on each wheel, and the cumulative crack length for
each wheel is shown in Table 5.
Table 4. Number of features on each wheel.
Left Right
Front 60 33
Middle 44 64
Rear 2 5
9

PAGE 10
Figure 20. Damage per wheel skin sections for sols 490, 1682 and 2115
Table 5. Cumulative crack length of each wheel (mm).
Left Right
Front 3,341 772
Middle 2,950 3,466
Rear 65 129
The RM wheel has the most features and largest cumulative
crack length, followed by the LF wheel and then the LM
wheel. The LF wheel has nearly twice as many features
and 4.3 times the cumulative crack length as the RF wheel.
There is no obvious explanation for the disparity in damage
between the LF and RF wheel, and although there are several
hypotheses, this subject is still under investigation.
Figure 22 shows wheel status per skin section and cumulative
damage per wheel section, as of sol 3195. Figures 23, 24,
25 and 26 contain all the front and middle wheel images
acquired during the sol 3195 FMWI, with some notable
features annotated by their identiﬁcation numbers.
10

PAGE 11
Figure 21. Cumulative damage per wheel sections for sol 490, 1682 and 2115.
11

PAGE 12
Figure 22. Wheel skin section status and cumulative damage per wheel sections, as of sol 3195
12

PAGE 13
Figure 23. Sol 3195 MAHLI images of the LF wheel. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
Figure 24. Sol 3195 MAHLI images of the RF wheel. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
13

PAGE 14
Figure 25. Sol 3195 MAHLI images of the LM wheel. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
Figure 26. Sol 3195 Mastcam images of the RM wheel. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
14

PAGE 15
Figure 27. Sol 3005 overhead MAHLI view (top) and sol
3011 underbelly MAHLI view (bottom) of a ﬂap of skin bent
inward on the LM wheel inbetween grousers 12 and 13.
Where there is a large hole in a wheel, a skin section has either
broken away from the wheel and fallen onto the Martian
surface or the skin section is still attached to the wheel and
is pushed inward. A skin section that is still attached to
the wheel and pushed inward is called a ﬂap. A ﬂap is
identiﬁed by the wheel it is on and the crack number it is
associated with. Figure 27 shows an overhead and underbelly
MAHLI view of ﬂap LM-4, acquired on sol 3005 and 3011,
respectively. Flap LM-4 is in between grouser 12 and 13 and
was ﬁrst observed in the sol 1127 FMWI.
Theoretically, a ﬂap could be long enough to contact the
cable that runs to a wheel actuator. Damage to a wheel
actuator cable could cause loss of commandability of that
wheel. Therefore, ﬂaps are monitored each FMWI. However,
the risk of a ﬂap causing damage to a wheel actuator cable is
considered low. Finite element analysis indicates that a ﬂap
of wheel skin long enough to reach a wheel actuator cable
would break off before contacting a cable.
The length of ﬂap LM-4 is estimated to be 109.8 mm, well
short of the 181.5 mm minimum distance between the inner
Figure 28. Wheel life testing was performed in the JPL
Mars Yard using a three-wheel test rig with rocker and bogie
suspension arms and a front, middle, and rear wheel. Image
Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
wheel surface and the wheel actuator cable. The base of ﬂap
LM-4 is folded at grouser 13, therefore, ﬂap LM-4 cannot
grow any longer.
5. H OW WHEEL DAMAGE ASSESSMENT HAS
INFLUENCED DRIVING GUIDELINES
After completing the ﬁrst FMWI on sol 490 and convening
the Tiger team, the MSL Operations team put numerous con-
straints in place with the goal of minimizing wheel damage
while the Tiger team conducted its investigation into the
mechanics of wheel wear. These constraints and practices
changed and evolved quickly as the team’s understanding
of wheel wear improved. Drive distance was restricted to
distances over which terrain could be evaluated by RPs during
the drive planning process. This effectively restricted the
use of Curiosity’s autonomous navigation (AutoNav) driving
modes which conduct terrain safety assessments in real time
at distances beyond what can be evaluated for safety by RPs.
Drives during this period of time were typically less than 30
m. Beyond that distance, it was difﬁcult to identify high-
risk rocks to wheel damage in navigation camera images.
The team also captured SPMWI as often as possible, after
or between drives along the strategic route.
Figure 28 illustrates a three-wheel test rig used in the Mars
Yard to perform wheel life testing [5]. As Mars Yard testing
conﬁrmed the role of small, pointed, embedded rocks on
accruing wheel damage, the strategic route planning team
altered the route planned for the rover with the goal of tran-
sitioning to more wheel friendly terrain without signiﬁcantly
increasing total drive distance towards the next goal. Use of
AutoNav and multi-sol driving was formally restricted on sol
516.
The Operations team also implemented a policy to maxi-
mize backwards driving, which was proven to reduce wheel
damage to the middle and front wheels at the expense of
increasing damage to the less worn rear wheels. Driving
backwards increases the duration and complexity of a drive
due to the added time for additional turning and terrain imag-
ing. SPMWI continued to be performed at 30 m intervals,
15

PAGE 16
while FMWI, initially requested at approximately 100 m
intervals, was increased to 200 m on sol 537.
Additional testing informed the team that the extra odometry
accumulated on the wheels while turning (which requires
steering the front and rear wheels in place) negated the
advantages of driving backwards. The emphasis on priori-
tizing backward driving was removed under conditions where
terrain is rated as benign or when there are no areas that allow
for turning at low cost to the wheels. Current Wheel Wear
Driving Guidelines:
1. Minimize Turning
• Drive forward in benign terrain.
• In challenging terrain, drive backwards if there are areas
of benign terrain which allow for the turning at low cost
to the wheels. Otherwise drive forward.
2. AutoNav is permitted for single sol use in any traversable
terrain
• No distance restriction on AutoNav as long as the
rover is constrained to stay on strategically approved
terrain. RPs and Surface Properties Scientist (SPS) may
extrapolate to unseen terrain based on ground images and
homogenous terrain from orbital images.
3. Minimize wheel contact with embedded rocks that can
results in single points of contact.
4. When driving on loose material, minimize wheel contact
with rocks taller than 8 cm that could result in a single
point of contact. Smaller rocks are expected to be
depressed into the terrain and are less of a threat to the
wheels.
To facilitate strategic route planning with the reduction of
wheel damage in mind, extensive efforts were made to map
the different terrain types making up the preferred MSL
route in conjunction with geologists on the MSL science
team. Mars Yard wheel testing along with damage rate data
provided by FMWI assessments informed the classiﬁcation
of different types with respect to their likelihood to cause
wheel damage. This allowed the Operations team to select
paths that biased the rover away from travelling over regions
identiﬁed as ”Irregular Sharp Outcrop”, the most threatening
to wheel health [6]. Terrain classiﬁcations for wheel wear
were updated and revised frequently over the next few years
of the MSL mission.
One goal of wheel wear terrain classiﬁcation was the cre-
ation of a predictive damage model based on terrain type.
Using wheel wear crack measurements accumulated with
every FMWI since sol 490 and damage curves from different
terrain types tested in the Mars Yard, the Wheel Wear team
established a numerical ranking scale for different terrains.
The model went into use on sol 1127. The goal of the scale
was to capture the approximate rate of damage growth seen
driving over different terrains and use the rates to estimate
the impact of future drive routes on wheel wear. The range of
values (1-10) capture uncertainty or error in the damage scale
due to potential differences in speciﬁc interactions between
rock, substrate, and wheel. The original terrain rankings were
modiﬁed on sol 1798 to account for an additional 6 km of
wheel wear data. The majority of driving during this period
was spent on variations of Murray Formation terrain. Both
sets of ratings are shown in Table 6.
Since reaching approximately 11,000 m on the surface of
Mars, wheel damage rates have remained consistently lower
than terrain classiﬁcation-based predictions, even as the rover
has traversed multiple distinct geologic regions. This is
Table 6. Terrain Classiﬁcation Damage Ratings
Terrain
Class
Description Rating
Released
Sol 1127
Rating
Updated
Sol 1798
Ripples Sandy 1 1
Smooth Sandy, small
rocks will press
into substrate
1-3 1-3
Smooth
with
Rocks
Sandy, avoidable
large rocks
3-4 3-4
Murray
Forma-
tion
Hard and smooth,
size of loose
rocks on surface
determines range
of wheel damage
6-10 2-6
Caprock
Smooth
Hard substrate
with sand patches
6-7 4-5
Caprock Hard substrate
with embedded
rock
7-9 4-7
Caprock
Rough
Hard substrate
with a high
density of
embedded rock
7-10 5-8
Rock
Field
Ranges from
loose rock
scattered in sand
to large
embedded rocks
in substrate
4-9 4-9
attributed to RP drive guidelines effectively preventing MSL
from driving over sharp embedded rocks along with an over-
all reduction in terrain risk. A large percentage of early
mission driving was done on caprock on the plains. The
transition onto the softer bedrock of Mount Sharp (Murray
Formation) marked a key inﬂection point in the damage
curves of the front and middle wheels. Most wheel wear ac-
cumulated since leaving the Pahrump Hills region at 11,000
km is associated wheel interactions with small pebbles and
occasional unavoidable rocks that are largely terrain type
independent. Further attempts to reclassify terrain types with
respect to wheel wear were made in 2019, but did not result in
a more accurate model when compared to historical damage
rates. Use of the wheel wear terrain classiﬁcation ratings as a
tool for estimating future damage rates was discontinued after
the sol 2592 FMWI.
Following the sol 1512 FMWI (15,080 m driven), the re-
quired cadence of wheel imaging was reduced signiﬁcantly in
response to a drop-off in wheel damage rate. Regular SPMWI
was discontinued and became an activity only executed if
requested by the Wheel Wear team. The FMWI cadence was
updated to occur every 500 m.
Performing FMWI is a resource expensive activity to perform
on Mars. The activity itself can take between 2 and 2.5 hours
to execute and requires the repeated unstowing and stowing
of the robotic arm between short drives to capture images
of the wheels in all ﬁve positions. Given the consistent rate
of damage seen over the course of several years, the FMWI
cadence was reduced again to 1000 m on sol 2781, which has
remained the cadence as of sol 3195.
16

PAGE 17
Figure 29. Wheel Damage vs Distance Driven as of the sol 3195 FMWI.
While damage rates have remained approximately linear for
several years and many kilometers of driving, several major
milestones in wheel life have been observed. The sol 1641
FMWI image set revealed the ﬁrst two broken grousers on the
LM wheel just a few sols before the ﬁrst TRCTL checkout
test on Mars on sol 1646. Tiger team testing established
three broken grousers on a single wheel as a signiﬁcant wheel
life milestone, equating to a wheel reaching 60% of its
life. The Wheel Wear team’s primary goal is to extend the
life of Curiosity’s damaged wheels so the mobility system
can continue to support MSL’s extended mission science
objectives.
The historical damage rate of the ﬂight vehicle’s wheels
is typically compared to the rate of damage seen by the
”Good Blue” test wheel, a wheel driven to failure during
wheel life testing on artiﬁcial terrain with a moderate damage
risk rating. The color rated terrains were created by terrain
scientists on the Tiger Team to best represent the range of
terrain severity Curiosity had driven on to that point, with
Good Blue and Bad Blue differentiating the least and most
harsh variations of nominal driving terrain. Good Blue would
rate a 4-5 on the terrain classiﬁcation scale developed later,
while Bad Blue would rate 7-8. The Good Blue test wheel
serves as a convenient reference to the ﬂight wheels because
its damage rate expressed as growth of total crack length over
distance driven is comparable to the linear rates observed in
ﬂight for the last 15 km of driving.
Two metrics derived from wheel life testing are used to
compare the state of the ﬂight wheels to test articles:
1. Total damage accumulated on a wheel
2. Distance driven since the ﬁrst broken grouser.
Wheel life testing identiﬁed 3200 mm as the average amount
of damage seen on a single wheel when its 3rd grouser broke.
As of sol 3195, the latest FMWI as of this publication, wheels
LF, LM, and RM are all within +/- 2 standard deviations of
this value, but only LM has experienced 3 broken grousers.
The second metric estimates that the 3rd broken grouser could
be expected on a wheel 3.6 km after the ﬁrst break is seen.
LM, by comparison, drove 9.2 km before the 3rd break was
seen on sol 3079. These trends speak to the efﬁcacy of
TRCTL and RP driving guidelines reducing the frequency
and likelihood of the high energy terrain interactions required
to break wheel grousers. Figure 29 shows the damage
accumulation on all 6 wheels over the course of the mission.
Wheel life testing indicates that performance degradation
of a single wheel and its impact on the mobility system
performance as a whole is not seen until all 19 grousers are
broken on a single wheel. Of particular concern is the loss of
structural integrity of the wheel at end-of-life, which poses a
threat to the rest of the mobility system hardware, including
the drive and steer actuators. Testing conducted in 2018
determined that if a wheel reaches the heavily damaged state
17

PAGE 18
of 19 broken grousers, the broken sections of the wheel can
be removed in-situ through a process called Wheel Shedding,
further extending the life of the wheel beyond 19 broken
grousers. It is not expected that this will be required on
MSL. The milestone for deciding whether to pursue Wheel
Shedding in ﬂight is when 14 broken grousers are seen on a
single wheel [9].
The rate of broken grousers of the Good Blue test wheel
is used as a worst-case estimate for when LM could reach
the 14 broken grousers milestone. Flight data has already
demonstrated that LM’s broken grousers are well below the
pace of Good Blue. Also factored into this prediction is the
estimated reduction in drive distance per year as the MSL
rover continues to age. MSL’s Multi-Mission Radioisotope
Thermoelectric Generator (MMRTG) power source output
decays over time, reducing the amount of energy available
each day for science and engineering activities on Mars. One
impact of the reduction in available power is an inability to
maintain MSL’s historical 3 km/yr drive rate. As wheel dam-
age and broken grouser estimates are a function of distance
driven, the reduction in drive rate will lengthen the estimated
remaining life of the wheels.
6. S UMMARY
After notable damage to Curiosity’s wheels was observed
early in the mission, FMWI was developed as a routine
activity to assess and quantify wheel wear. It is the primary
means of understanding the rate of wheel damage, an increase
in which could restrict drive distance resulting in reduced
science return. FMWI is a manually intensive process, so
there is a continuing need to improve its efﬁciency as the
mission’s resources shrink. The most recent FMWI on sol
3195 provided the mission with an update on the current state
of Curiosity’s wheels after 26.3 km of driving. Curiosity
currently has several large skin sections missing and a total of
4 broken grousers, three on the LM wheel and one on the RM
wheel. That’s signiﬁcantly less than the 14 grouser breaks
predicted on a single wheel after 24 km of driving [10].
Because Curiosity has recently been trending below wheel
damage predictions, the FMWI cadence has been relaxed rel-
ative to requirements earlier in the mission. In addition to the
development of FMWI, several operational strategies were
initially pursued to reduce the rate of wheel damage. The
most effective of these has proved to be hazard avoidance.
The RPs avoid hazards by identifying sharp obstacles and
intentionally navigating around them. The reduced damage
rate is also attributed to the implementation of the TRCTL
driving algorithm. Other mitigation strategies such as terrain
classiﬁcation and SPMWI were developed but were eventu-
ally retired due to lack of added value.
Although Curiosity’s wheels continue to accumulate damage
as the rover continues to drive across mixed Martian terrain,
an individual wheel can absorb signiﬁcant damage before it
causes any impact to mobility performance. Testing in the
JPL Mars Yard on the Scarecrow testbed rover [11] indicates
that Curiosity could continue to drive indeﬁnitely on the
portion of a wheel that remains when all the grousers on a
wheel breaks, if the unconstrained portion of the wheel can
be safely shed [9].
The wheels for the Mars 2020 (M2020) Perseverance rover
were redesigned with knowledge from MSL to prevent it from
experiencing wheel damage as severe as its older sibling.
Figure 30 contains a side-by-side view of a Curiosity wheel
and a Perseverance wheel. Most notably, the Perseverance
wheel has skin that is more than twice as thick and has nearly
twice as many grousers. Over the ﬁrst eight months of Mars
2020 surface operations (as of sol 223), Perseverance has
driven 2,663.7 meters. As expected, no wheel damage has
been observed. Although TRCTL has been implemented as a
patch for Perseverance, it would require additional validation
testing if a decision was made to use it on Perseverance.
Figure 30. Side-by-side view of a Curiosity and
Perseverance wheel. Image Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research described in this paper was performed at the
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology,
under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration. The authors would like to thank the Mars
Science Laboratory Program for supporting this research,
Howard Eisen for providing MPF wheel documentation,
Patrick Degrosse for providing MSL and M2020 wheel docu-
mentation, and Matt Heverly for discussions related to wheel
wear.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Rankin, M. Maimone, J. Biesiadecki, N. Patel,
D. Levine, and O. Toupet, “Driving Curiosity: Mars
rover mobility trends duing the ﬁrst seven years,” in
IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big Sky, Montana, USA,
Mar. 2020.
[2] D. Bickler, “Roving over Mars,” ASME Mechanical
Engineering Magazine, vol. 120, no. 4, pp. 73–77, Apr.
1998.
[3] E. Tunstel, M. Maimone, A. Trebi-Ollennu, J. Yen,
R. Petras, and R. Willson, “Mars Exploration Rover
mobility and robotic arm operational performance,” in
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, Waikoloa, Hawaii, USA, Oct. 2005.
[4] S. Haggart and J. Waydo, “The mobility system wheel
design for NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory mission,”
in 11th European Conference of the International So-
ciety for Terrain-Vehicle Systems , Torino, Italy, Nov.
2008.
[5] R. Rainen, “Mars Science Laboratory wheel damage
mechanical tiger ream ﬁnal report,” Nov. 2015, MSL
Internal Document.
[6] R. Arvidson, P. DeGrosse, J. Grotzinger, M. Heverly,
J. Shechet, S. Moreland, M. Newby, N. Stein, A. Steffy,
18

PAGE 19
F. Zhou, A. Zastrow, A. Vasavada, A. Fraeman, and
E. Stilly, “Relating geologic units and mobility system
kinematics contributing to Curiosity wheel damage at
Gale Crater, Mars,”Journal of Terramechanics, vol. 73,
pp. 73–93, Oct. 2017.
[7] E. Lakdawalla, “Curiosity wheel dam-
age: The problem and solutions,”
https://www.planetary.org/articles/08190630-curiosity-
wheel-damage, Aug. 2014, accessed: 2021-11-07.
[8] O. Toupet, J. Biesiadecki, A. Rankin, A. Steffy,
G. Meirion-Grifﬁth, D. Levine, M. Schadegg, and
M. Maimone, “Terrain-adaptive wheel speed control on
the Curiosity Mars rover: Algorithm and ﬂight results,”
Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 699–728,
Aug. 2020.
[9] E. Graser, S. McGill, A. Rankin, and A. Bielawiec,
“Rimmed wheel performance on the Mars Science Lab-
oratory Scarecrow rover,” in IEEE Aerospace Confer-
ence, Big Sky, Montana, Mar. 2020.
[10] A. Steffy, “Wheel wear strategic plan,” Oct. 2016, MSL
Internal Document.
[11] M. Heverly, J. Matthews, J. Lin, D. Fuller, M. Maimone,
J. Biesiadecki, and J. Leichty, “Traverse performance
characterization for the Mars Science Laboratory rover,”
Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 835–846,
Sep. 2013.
BIOGRAPHY [
Arturo Rankin received his Ph.D. in
Mechanical Engineering at the Univer-
sity of Florida in 1997. He is currently a
Robotic Systems Engineer in the Robot
Operations group at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, and the M2020 Robot Op-
erations deputy lead. Prior to that, he
was the MSL Mobility/Mechanisms team
lead and the MSL Flight Software team
lead.
Nikunj Patel is a Tactical Downlink
Lead for MSL, which follows the re-
sponsibilities of a ﬂight director on the
mission. In addition to that, he is also
the Mobility Subject Matter Expert and
the Wheel Wear team lead for Curios-
ity Rover. He received his Masters in
Aerospace Engineering from University
of Central Florida (UCF) where he led
multiple cubesatellite development ma-
chines through AIAA and UCF . In addition to that, Nikunj
designed the ﬁrst Ground Support Biobarrier (GSB) that
would be utilized by NASA’s Planetary Protection (PP) team
to meet stringent bioburden requirements for future life detec-
tion missions to other terrestrial bodies.
Evan Graser is a Systems Engineer in
the Engineering Operations for Surface
Missions group at JPL. He is currently
the MSL Mobility/Mechanisms subsys-
tem team lead and the deputy lead of the
M2020 Perseverance Mobility downlink
team. He is a member and the lead
trainer of the MSL Engineering Oper-
ations Systems team. Evan received is
MS in Aerospace Engineering from the
University of Colorado, Boulder.
Jiun-Kai Freddy Wang is a Mechatron-
ics Engineer in the Mechanisms and Mo-
bility group at JPL. He built and tested
MSL heritage actuators and seal dis-
pensing mechanisms for the Mars 2020
mission before joining MSL as a member
of the Mobility/Mechanisms subsystem
team. He received his Bachelor of Sci-
ence in Mechanical Engineering from
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Kimberly Rink is a Systems Engineer
in the Engineering Operations for Sur-
face Missions group at JPL. She cur-
rently leads the Fault Protection subsys-
tem team, operates and maintains the ve-
hicle and mission systems testbeds, and
is a member of the Mobility/Mechanisms
subsystem team for MSL. Kim received
her MS in Aeronautics and Astronautics
from Purdue University.
19